



The Orphic Hymns
TRANSLATION, INTRODUCTION, AND NOTES BY
Apostolos N. Athanassakis and Benjamin M. Wolkow

© 2013 Apostolos N. Athanassakis and Benjamin M. Wolkow
All rights reserved. Published 2Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  The Johns Hopkins University Press
2715 North Charles Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4www.press.jhu.edu
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Orphic hymns. English.
The Orphic hymns / translation, introduction, and notes by Apostolos N. Athanassakis
and Benjamin M. Wolkow.
pages. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4214-0881-1 (hdbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-4214-0882-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
— ISBN 978-1-4214-0886-6 (electronic) — ISBN 1-4214-0881-3 (hdbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN
1-4214-0882-1 (pbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 1-4214-0886-4 (electronic)
1. Orphic hymns. I. Athanassakis, Apostolos N. II. Wolkow, Benjamin M. III. Title.
PA4259.E5 2292.3′8—dc23              2012027A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library.
Special discounts are available for bulk purchases of this book. For more information,
please contact Special Sales at 410-516-6936 or specialsales@press.jhu.edu.
The  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press  uses  environmentally  friendly  book  materials,
including recycled text paper that is composed of at least 30 percent post-consumer
waste, whenever possible.

CONTENTS
Preface
Introduction
THE ORPHIC HYMNS
Orpheus to Mousaios
1. To Hekate
2. To Prothyraia
3. To Night
4. To Sky
5. To Ether
6. To Protogonos
7. To the Stars
8. To the Sun
9. To Selene
10. To Physis
11. To Pan
12. To Herakles
13. To Kronos
14. To Rhea
15. To Zeus
16. To Hera
17. To Poseidon
18. To Plouton
19. To Zeus the Thunderbolt
20. To Astrapaios Zeus
21. To the Clouds
22. To the Sea
23. To Nereus
24. To the Nereids
25. To Proteus
26. To Earth

27. To the Mother of the Gods
28. To Hermes
29. Hymn to Persephone
30. To Dionysos
31. Hymn to the Kouretes
32. To Athene
33. To Nike
34. To Apollon
35. To Leto
36. To Artemis
37. To the Titans
38. To the Kouretes
39. To Korybas
40  To Eleusinian Demeter
41. To Mother Antaia
42. To Mise
43. To the Seasons
44  To Semele
45. Hymn to Dionysos Bassareus and Triennial
46. To Liknites
47. To Perikionios
48. To Sabazios
49. To Hipta
50. To Lysios Lenaios
51. To the Nymphs
52. To the God of Triennial Feasts
53. To the God of Annual Feasts
54. To Silenos Satyros and the Bacchae
55. To Aphrodite
56. To Adonis
57. To Chthonic Hermes
58. To Eros
59. To the Fates
60. To the Graces
61. Hymn to Nemesis

62. To Dike
63. To Justice
64. Hymn to Nomos
65. To Ares
66. To Hephaistos
67. To Asklepios
68. To Hygeia
69. To the Erinyes
70. To the Eumenides
71. To Melinoe
72. To Tyche
73. To Daimon
74. To Leukothea
75. To Palaimon
76. To the Muses
77. To Mnemosyne
78. To Dawn
79. To Themis
80. To Boreas
81. To Zephyros
82. To Notos
83. To Okeanos
84. To Hestia
85. To Sleep
86. To Dream
87. To Death
Notes
Select Bibliography
Index Nominum
Index Locorum

PREFACE
IN 1977, Scholars Press (Atlanta, Georgia) published the first edition of Orphic Hymns:
Text, Translation and Notes by Apostolos N. Athanassakis for the Society of Biblical
Literature's Texts and Translations, Graeco-Roman Religion Series. The text used for
that edition, as for the present one, is that by Wilhelm Quandt. Occasionally Gabriella
Ricciardelli's more recent text was also consulted for the present edition. The translation
from the first edition has been revisited and rejuvenated. In all cases which involve
change the purpose has been to attain a greater flow, especially such as is appropriate to
a  sacred  text  consisting  of  lengthy  lists  of  epithets.  The  introduction  is  more
comprehensive and the notes offer the reader much more information. It is hoped that
the indices will be a welcome addition.
Professor Athanassakis wishes to express his warmest thanks to Miss Allison Emily
Page for her patient assistance in the preparation of substantial portions of the book. He
has  over  the  years  received  a  great  deal  of  inspiration  from  the  works  of  Juha
Pentikäinen, who introduced him to the study of the Kalevala as well as of bear rituals
among the Sami people of the subarctic expanses.
Dr. Wolkow would like to thank the Classics departments at Duke University, Loyola
University Chicago, and the University of Georgia at Athens, and in particular Diskin
Clay, Erika Hermanowicz, and Charles Platter. Parts of the introduction and of the
notes to hymn 34 were originally presented at a talk he delivered at the University of
Georgia entitled “Play It Again, Sun: Cosmic Music and the Orphic Hymns,” and he is
grateful for the warm reception and incisive feedback from the participants that day. He
further wishes to acknowledge the influence of former professors Borimir Jordan,
Robert Renehan, and, of course, Apostolos Athanassakis, who graciously invited him to
take part in the revision of the original edition of the Hymns. Finally, he dedicates his
contributions to the present volume to his mythology students, both past and future.
The authors are very appreciative of the Johns Hopkins University Press, above all
our former and current editors, Michael Lonegro and Matthew McAdam, respectively,
for their many indulgences as the project began to take on a life of its own. Professor
Louis Karchin, Professor of Music at New York University, has put a few of the hymns
to music. Dancers of classical ballet, persons interested in spirituality, and students from
as far as China have expressed further interest in the Orphic Hymns. All this has helped
us sustain our enthusiasm for this rare poetic composition of late antiquity.

INTRODUCTION
ANTIQITY is virtually silent on the Orphic Hymns. The oldest reference to them is found in a
scholium on Hesiod's Theogony by Ioannes Galenos (first half of the twelfth century AD).
Galenos refers to them three times in the same scholium but says nothing about their
authorship or literary value.
The first manuscript of the Hymns to reach the West was the one carried to Venice
by Giovanni Aurispa in 1423. It seems that another manuscript was taken to Italy by
Franciscus  Philadelphus  four  years  later  in  1427.  Both  of  these  manuscripts,  and
perhaps four others, have been lost. The loss of the manuscript brought to Venice by
Aurispa  is  especially  regrettable  since  it  may  have  served  as  the  archetype  of  all
surviving codices. Of these we have thirty-six, twenty-five on paper and eleven on skin.
Some  of  these  codices  contain  only  a  portion  of  the Hymns.  The  same  codices
frequently contain the Homeric hymns, Hesiodea, the Orphic Argonautika, and the
hymns of Proclus and Kallimakhos. As for the date of these codices, it seems safe to
infer that they were all copied between 1450 and 1550.
We  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  codex  Aurispa  brought  with  him  from
Constantinople in 1423 stirred up considerable excitement among the learned. On the
other hand, it may not have been until the arrival in Venice of the Greek sage Georgios
Gemistos (usually surnamed Plethon) sometime in the middle of the fifteenth century
that the Italians really took notice of the Orphic Hymns. The editio princeps was printed
in Florence in 1500. It also contains the Orphic Argonautica and some of the hymns of
Proclus. By the year 1600 there were five more editions, one of which was Aldine's,
published in 1517. From the editions that followed in subsequent centuries the one that
excels all others—perhaps to this day—is Gottfried Hermann's 1805 work. Abel's
edition in 1885 has been received with adverse criticism. Wilhelm Quandt had finished
his edition by 1941, but the vicissitudes of the war forced most scholars to wait until
1955 to reap the benefits of his labors from its reprinted and somewhat augmented
version.
A date of composition cannot be assigned to the Hymns with any certainty. A few
ancient sources make direct or oblique references to Orphic hymns, but they need not
refer to our Hymns. It is much more reasonable to assume that the expression “Hymns
of Orpheus” (e.g., Plato Laws 829d–e, Pausanias 9.30.12) does not refer to a specific
collection such as the one at our disposal but rather to Orphic poetry—perhaps even of
the oral variety—that was attributed to the founder of Orphism. In the first oration
against Aristogeiton, Pseudo-Demosthenes tells us that “Orpheus says that she [Dike]

sits beside the throne of Zeus and watches over all human matters” (25.11). The
similarity between this statement and lines 2–3 in the hymn to Dike (hymn 62) has been
noticed, but it would be unwise to build a hypothesis of composition on what must have
become a common metaphor.
But the Orphic Hymns still may have existed quite early and gone unnoticed. After
all, antiquity treated the much older Homeric hymns with astonishing indifference.
Those scholars who place the composition of the Orphic Hymns within the first four
centuries of our era are probably closer to the truth. The relative purity of the language
and the nearly flawless hexameter would argue for the earlier part of this period. So
would also the remarkable absence of anything faintly Christian. There is a syncretism,
but the syncretism is that of unmistakably pagan elements. The content of the Hymns
themselves yields nothing certain. However, the hymn to Apollon (hymn 34) contains
some specific musical technical terms, and the collocation of ideas in lines 16–strongly  suggests  that  the  composer  was  at  least  vaguely  familiar  with  Ptolemy's
Harmonics.
 This would provide a terminus post quem of about 200 AD. It is true that we
have scant evidence for the existence of Orphic cults in the later Roman imperial
period. On the other hand, the predilection of the Severan dynasty (193 to 235 AD) for
Eastern institutions and ideas favored a movement for religious reform and a tolerance
that  eventually  culminated  in  the  resuscitation  and  flourishing  of  many  mystic,
especially Dionysian, cults. It may have been exactly in this sort of climate and at such a
time that underground remnants of Orphism surfaced again to reassert the tenacity of
the legendary divine musician of Thrace. Perhaps then a date in the middle of the third
century AD is as good a guess as any.
The place in which the Hymns were composed and originally used is a mystery. The
appearance in the Hymns of divinities hardly known or totally unknown to mainland
Greece should turn our attention eastward to Asia Minor, where, in fact, the names of
some of these less known Asiatic gods have been consistently turning up in inscriptions.
The three most telling names are Mise, Hipta, and Melinoe, all three previously known
only from the Hymns until the soil of western Anatolia revealed their existence in
inscriptions.  Otto  Kern  in  1911  was  the  first  to  suggest  that  Pergamum  was  the
birthplace of the Hymns and that they were used in mystic Dionysian ceremonies in the
temenos of Demeter in the city. His suggestion has found both sympathizers and critics
among scholars. Until epigraphic and other evidence points to some other place we
might consider Kern's theory a distinct possibility.
The Orphic Hymns constitute a distinct collection, and they should be seen as one part
of a vast ancient literature that modern scholars label “Orphic.” However, the term
“Orphic” is somewhat misleading. It implies something unified, stable, and definable—

something like a movement, a genre, a type of phenomenon. But in actuality “Orphic” is
a sort of catch-all term that is used to designate anything and everything directly or
indirectly connected to Orpheus. And who this figure was leads to even more ambiguity.
We do not know if he ever existed. Traditionally he was from the wilds of Thrace, a
foreigner to the Greeks, and a bard of great renown, sometimes thought to be even
earlier than Homer and Hesiod. He was so proficient with his stringed instrument, the
lyre, that he could sway inanimate objects and even bring the lord and lady of the dead
to tears. In addition to his amazing musical talents, he knew of secret rites, usually those
of Dionysos, and particularly those dealing with the salvation of the soul after death, and
these he taught to his fellow man in the form of mysteries. Indeed, Orpheus himself
descended to the land of death in order to win back his beloved Eurydike, who had died
before her time. His tragic failure has become one of the most haunting legacies
bequeathed to us by the poets of old. There were in fact a number of poems in
circulation attributed to Orpheus in the ancient world. Some seem to have been quite
old, perhaps even pre-Classical, but others were composed at a later time and claimed to
be his. These poems have come down to us in fragments, quoted or alluded to in an
astonishing variety of authors from all periods, in both prose and poetry and in both
Greek and Latin. The fragments are assiduously collected in Bernabé's Teubner edition.
While geared to scholars, even readers with little or no knowledge of ancient languages
will find it a useful resource. Bernabé gathers the primary sources, and, with a little
tenacity in learning the abbreviations for author and work, one can easily track down a
suitable English translation for most of them.
Two notable Orphic documents may be mentioned here. The first one is an extremely
important  papyrus  text  that  was  discovered  in  Macedonia  in  1962,  known  as  the
Derveni Papyrus and datable to the second half of the fourth century BC. It is in a
lacunose state, but there is ample enough material to determine that the author was
writing a philosophical interpretation of some theogonic poem he ascribes to Orpheus.
Another is a group known as the Bacchic gold tablets. There are thirty-nine of these,
dating from 400 BC to 200 AD, found from Rome to Asia Minor, from Macedonia to
Krete. They are inscriptions on thin gold leaf that were found in graves. Some just have
a name, presumably of the person buried, who was an initiate in the mysteries. Some
contain instructions for the soul on what to do once it arrives at the underworld in order
to secure its special dispensation, its reward for being initiated in the mysteries while
living.
One important fact that clearly emerges from this “Orphic” literature is that there had
developed what we may call an “Orphic” mythology, one that appropriated much from
the “official” mythologies in Homer and Hesiod but extended them in idiosyncratic
ways.  Cosmogony/theogony  was  a  widely  disseminated  type,  although there  were
numerous variations. Three versions were preserved by the Neoplatonist Damascius,

who attributed one to the Peripatetic Eudemos and another to a certain Hieronymos
and/or Hellanikos and who cited a third from a poem he called the Orphic Rhapsodies
(probably  the  same  as  the  one  that  appears  elsewhere  under  the  title  of Sacred
Discourses in Twenty-Four Rhapsodies).
 Despite these many and convoluted accounts,
certain details are found again and again in our sources with enough consistency that we
can  at  times  with  some  confidence  designate  something  as  “Orphic”  or  at  least
influenced by “Orphic” literature. Our collection is “Orphic” in this sense.
There is little to force us to the assumption of a single authorship for all the Hymns.
Indeed, we can scarcely assume that the collection was composed at once. The opening
to Mousaios, for example, has come under suspicion.
 However, the Hymns do give the
impression of being the work of a religious antiquary who had ready access to some sort
of concordance from which he marshaled forth hosts of epithets that he then linked
together in hexameters. This is more or less the view of Christian Lobeck, a view that is
bound to be shared by those who consider the Hymns literary rather than religious
documents.  Albrecht  Dieterich  and  Kern,  and  later  William  Guthrie,  have  taken
exception to this opinion. It is reasonable to think that when in the third century AD many
Dionysian cults were revived and made to serve as a convenient umbrella for the
resurrection of Orphic elements, revered literary sources and earlier ritual practices,
such as the Eleusinian mysteries, were tapped for the creation of appropriate cult
literature.  Every  religion  known  to  man  is  an  amalgamation  of  various  religious
movements. Here we must mention the concept of the bricoleur suggested by Fritz Graf
and Sarah Johnston in discussing how the peculiar Orphic mythology might have been
developed.
The Hymns stand as a particular example of a very old genre that survived throughout
antiquity. A hymn is essentially a poem sung in praise of a god, often with a request or
prayer. The word “hymn” can be used as a generic term, or to designate a specific
genre, such as Pindar's hymns. Over time, a wide variety developed. A hymn might
contain narrative, long or short, such as some of the Homeric hymns. A hymn might
have cultic function, such as the Kretan hymn found at Palaikastro that invokes Zeus as
the greatest kouros (fourth century BC, possibly older). A hymn can be purely lyrical, such
as those of Mesomedes (mid-second century AD), some of whose works survive with
musical notation. We find hymns as dedications, inscribed on pillars or walls, such as
the four hymns by Isidoros of the Fayum (88–80 BC). Some scraps of poetry found in the
magical papyri, often metrically faulty, have been titled “hymns” by scholars, but one
should regard the reconstructed versions by the editor of the papyri, Karl Preisendanz,
with caution. Philosophers wrote hymns, too, such as the Stoic Kleanthes' Hymn to Zeus
(early- to mid-third century BC) and the surviving group by the Neoplatonist Proclus

(fifth century AD). Prose was also a vehicle for hymns. The story of Atlantis that Kritias
tells is prefaced with a thanks to Sokrates and also noted as a kind of hymn in honor of
Athene,  whose  festival,  the  Panathenaia,  was  taking  place  (Plato Timaios  21a).  A
number of prose hymns were written by Aelius Aristides (mid-second century AD).
Hymns can also be embedded in other works. In Apuleius' Metamorphoses, Lucius has
had it with being a literal ass, and, after bathing himself seven times in a river (seven
being a holy number according to Pythagoras), he invokes Isis the moon goddess in
hymnic style (11.2). Finally, Ovid, as one would expect, plays with the genre when he
has his lovesick Apollon call out to the fleeing Daphne the identity of her pursuer in
terms that are typical of the genre: a list of favorite cult sites and the wide powers of the
divinity addressed (Metamorphoses 1.515–524). The joke is that it is the god himself,
not the petitioner, who utters the hymn; the inversion is both a mocking and serious
testament to the power of love.
Our composer has freely drawn on this venerable tradition. In addition to literature
and religion, philosophy, too, has made its mark, though it is difficult to adduce parallels
with certainty. Stoicism seems to have been particularly influential. Such hymns as
those to Ether, the Stars, Physis, Boreas, Zephyros, Notos, being personifications of
natural phenomena, may point to Stoic influence. So may the invocation of Pronoia
(Providence) in the proemic piece (line 30). The prominence of the fiery element as
found, e.g., in hymns 5.4 and 66.4–5 would further appear to reflect Stoic belief. Yet it
could be argued for some of these (and others) that the deciding influence was from the
Pre-Socratics (e.g., Empedokles, Herakleitos), Pythagoreanism, and even Neoplatonism
or Neopythagoreanism. There is so much fusion of different philosophical ideas in this
collection that the only thing that can be said of them in this regard is that they
represent a confluence and a monument to the syncretism that characterized religion in
general during the Hellenistic and especially Imperial era. Their composer was not
interested in creating a religious or philosophical system. The initiates wanted to protect
their lives and save their souls. And to this end they needed the good will of every god
and every daimōn. The texts that they used in their rites are interesting not so much as
poetry but as repositories of religious ideas, frequently borrowed from a wide range of
older literature and expressed by a means peculiar to a category of the hymnic genre.
Careful linguistic study of the provenance of many of the epithets in the hymns—
especially the hapax legomena—may help us answer some of the vexing questions that
surround them.
Like all religions, Orphism had its profound religious beliefs and taboos. The animal
sacrifice has a very special place in Greek religion. Those who participate are witnesses
to the proper execution of the ritual that involves the sacrificial meal, always performed

as an affirmation of shared religious beliefs. It is no accident that Orphism preached
respect for animal life and abstention from eating the flesh of animals. Belief in the
transmigration of souls, originally a Pythagorean one, made this prohibition necessary.
For  the  Orphics,  purification  from  guilt  and  pollution  was  a  spiritual  necessity,
especially since they believed that punishment for wrongs committed in this world was
inevitable. If it did not take place in a man's lifetime, it would certainly happen in the
subsequent one. The things from which an Orphic had to abstain threatened the purity
of his soul with miasma, pollution. Purification, katharsis, did not simply free the soul
from impurity but also protected a person from punishment and gave him the hope of
eternal life in Elysium. Those who reached the underworld and its various punishments,
all borrowed from Greek mythology, stayed there. They were then the unredeemed,
doomed to be eternally deprived of the transmigration of their soul and thus the chance
for redemption.
The supreme god of Orphism was Dionysos, and at the center of this religious faith
was a cosmogony different from the one we learn from Hesiod's Theogony. Orphism
preached the simple idea that the world was born from an egg. This primordial egg
hatched out the first god, Eros, who was later named Protogonos and Phanes and who
was  said  to  be  both  male  and  female.  He  then  created  the  world.  The  Hesiodic
succession of Sky, Kronos, and Zeus was retained. Appended to this was the story of
the death of Dionysos at the hands of the Titans, who tore him to pieces and devoured
him, and Dionysos' eventual rebirth.
 This significant theme was reenacted by the
ecstatic worshippers of Dionysos. Central to Orphism is the idea that the body is evil
and the soul is divine. In fact, the body is a tomb which serves as a prison for the
spiritual  entity  we  call  the  soul.  The  material  part  of  man,  the  body,  is  the  evil
inheritance  of  the  Titans.  The  spiritual  part,  the  soul,  comes  from  Dionysos,  an
immortal god and the son of Zeus. It is obvious that the Homeric concept of the living
body as the man himself and of the soul as a pale lifeless shadow of him is completely
inverted in Orphism.
The relation of Orpheus to Dionysus is peculiar. Both are connected with Thrace.
Dionysos is a god of transitions.
 Orpheus obviously could cross the boundaries of
culture into nature and back. He descended into the underworld to recover his beloved
Eurydike and came back alive. The meaning of this myth is twofold. Heavenly song can
conquer death and so can devotion to the beloved. But Eurydike, “wide justice,” remains
in the world below, desired but tantalizingly beyond the reach of the living. The mythic
prophet Orpheus dies a strange death; he is torn to pieces by Thracian maenads. This
death  is  analogous  to  the  one  Dionysos  himself  suffered.  Clearly  the  practice  of
Dionysian orgies, of tearing wild beasts into pieces and devouring their limbs, is a ritual
connected with the tragic dismemberment of Orpheus. Maenadic women also in a state
of ecstatic frenzy killed Pentheus, king of Thebes. In so many ways, Pentheus in the

story that is so powerfully told by Euripides in the Bacchae is the surrogate victim.
Pentheus dies so that Dionysus may live on forever.
Bits and pieces of Orphism are evident throughout the collection, but there is very
little about Orphic theogony, anthropogony, or eschatology. To be sure Protogonos is
equated with Phanes and is addressed as “born of the egg, delighting in his golden
wings” (hymn 6.2). Orphic anthropogony is alluded to in the hymn to the Titans (hymn
37.4–6): “From you are descended all toiling mortals, / the brood of the sea and of the
land, then the brood of the birds, / of all generations of the world born of you.” Kronos
and Time (Greek khronos) are characteristically equated at hymn 13.5 where Kronos is
called “begetter of time.” And certainly the phrase “dreadful Necessity governs all
things” (hymn 3.11) must have been pregnant with meaning for the initiate, since
Necessity mated with Time to give birth to Ether, Khaos, and Erebos. There is no hint
anywhere of animal sacrifices and of meat eating, even if Dionysos himself is addressed
as “ōmadios” (“taker of raw flesh”). This we may interpret as a concession to the non-
Orphic  side  of  the  god  and  as  part  of  the  comprehensiveness  of  poems  that  are
essentially conjuring formulae. Interestingly enough, it seems to be the persistent Orphic
aversion  to  the  crime  of ōmophagia  (eating  of  raw  flesh  and  thus  also  the
dismemberment of Dionysos) that accounts for its suppression in the hymn to the Titans
(hymn 37). Also Orphic, but not uniquely Orphic, is the sentiment expressed in the
varieties of the concluding formula that the addressee grant a good end to a life, since a
good life on earth attended by the proper rites of initiation and purification constitutes
some sort of guarantee of rewards, or at least of escape from punishment in the
afterlife. The idea held by the Orphics that the body was a prison for the soul is
expressed in the very last hymn (hymn 87.3–4).
 Referring as it does to a very central
and basic belief, it serves as an unmistakably Orphic capstone of an edifice to which
other religions and philosophical systems made generous contributions.
The question of Orphic rituals is a tantalizing one. Poems such as the Rhapsodies,
Argonautika, and Lithika were written in late antiquity. Falsely attributed to Orpheus,
they are a fantasy literature whose connection with Orphism ranges from non-existent to
tenuous. For Pindar, glorious Orpheus is the father of songs (Pythian Odes 4.176–177).
Immortality is conferred by lofty song. No Orphic ritual can emerge from the musings
of this most aristocratic Greek poet. The fascination with the Bacchic gold tablets is
justifiably enormous. Yet these fabulous fragments do not amount to a text that can help
us reconstruct even one Orphic ritual. Immortality of the soul is the key Orphic belief in
them. This central Orphic belief, I think, is the dominant theme of the Homeric Hymn
to Demeter, composed sometime in the seventh century BC, whose origins specialists in
Greek religion trace to an agricultural cult, specifically a fertility ritual. Caution must be

exercised here. Syncretism and fusion must not be forgotten. Demeter dips Demophoön
into fire to grant him immortality. Demeter's abducted daughter, Persephone, and her
journey to Hades and back into the upper world and into life is a great allegory for death
and resurrection and hence a great allegory for immortality. There is frequent mention
of ritual in connection with Orphism. Ancient references to Orphism and the Orphics
are not very helpful in this regard. The beautiful Orphic cosmogony in the Birds of
Aristophanes (685–704) teaches us ideas about the origin of the world. There is nothing
in it as to what one should or should not do. There are many references to Orpheus and
his  followers  in  Plato,  especially  in  the Republic.  They  are  mostly  philosophical
speculations about aspects of human eschatology. Orphism inspired Pythagoras to create
a rich type of theology that was founded on practice. Various details of the way his
followers lived have more to do with a holistic way of life and less with the performance
of certain rituals.
The cult of Dionysos was the most widespread in the Hellenized world. Religious
associations that honored both Orpheus and Dionysos seem to have existed everywhere,
and some rituals were called both Orphic and Dionysian. It seems quite clear from the
collection itself that the Hymns were used by such a religious association (thiasos) of
people who called themselves mustai, mustipoloi, or orgiophantai (mystic initiates) and
who through prayer (eukhē), libation (loibē), sacrifice (thusia), and, presumably, secret
ceremonies (orgia, teletai) invoked a series of divinities and asked for their presence or
for the gift of some blessing, such as wealth, peace, health, and not infrequently for a
blameless end to a good life. These associations had a definite hierarchy. One of the
most prominent officiates was the boukolos, the oxherd. This title occurs only twice in
the Orphic Hymns: at hymn 1.10 and hymn 31.7. It is reasonable to assume that the
underlying idea was that of the mediator who would help the initiates into a Dionysian
transformation. And it is equally reasonable to assume that a newly founded thiasos
commissioned one or more able poets to provide them with religious poetry that should
be as authentic and comprehensive as possible.
Most  of  the Hymns  are  addressed  to  divinities  and  concepts  of  the  Hellenistic
pantheon  and  its  train  of  lesser  divine  or  semi-divine  figures.  Such  personified
abstractions as Dike, Justice, and Nomos are so old and so common to various schools
of Greek philosophical and religious thought as not to be especially Orphic. The only
hymn to a god of Near Eastern origin is the one to Adonis. Three hymns are dedicated
to Anatolian goddesses (Mise, Hipta, Melinoe), and the Anatolian moon god Men is
mentioned in the opening address to Mousaios. The Orphic sympathies of the collection
are nowhere more evident than in the number and fervor of individual pieces addressed
to Dionysos. There are seven such hymns (possibly nine, if Mise and Korybas are
viewed as alternate manifestations of Dionysos), while Zeus has only three that are
specifically addressed to him. Dionysos is also frequently invoked or alluded to in many

other hymns, and his characteristic epithets seem to have been so infectious and to have
assumed such universal significance as to seriously have encroached on the territory of
other deities (see further hymn 30). This is as it should be, since Dionysos is the chief
Orphic god.
The Hymns were devotional. Perfumes are frequently mentioned at the beginning of
an individual hymn. Sometimes incense is mentioned specifically. Storax was imported
from Phoenicia, while incense and myrrh came from the Arabian Peninsula. There
seems to have been a certain protocol, and a preference for this or that kind of aromatic
substance. Incense for Sun, frankincense for Nike, Apollon, Artemis, Dionysos Liknites,
and several other divinities. Myrrh was offered to Protogonos, Poseidon, Nereus, and
Leto;  storax  to  Prothyraia,  Kronos,  Zeus,  Proteus,  Dionysos,  Demeter,  Chthonic
Hermes, etc. Crocus was offered to Ether, opium to Sleep, and simply perfumes for
Moon, Physis, Rhea, Athene, etc. As has been observed it is not easy to see the
connection between specific aromatic substances and ritualistic practices. The variety
might be attributed to the preference of persons who contributed the specific perfume
or other material. Perhaps also the season of the year played a role. The distribution of
perfumes and aromatic substances as they appear in our Hymns is such as to make it
impossible for us to offer a rational explanation of any systematic organization.
It makes sense to think that the time of chanting these beautiful hymns was evening.
For the initiates the day's labor was done and their worries could be set aside for the
replenishment of their souls and for a respite from the mundane realities of the world.
The Hymns  are  redolent  with  elements  of  mysticism.  Indeed,  the  most  pervasive
characteristic of the Hymns, the ubiquitous epithet, might be, in part, an indication of a
link  between  these  hymns  and  the  various  remains  of  magic  literature  from  the
Hellenistic  and  Roman  periods.  Both  direct  a  propitiatory  address  to  a  deity,
accompanied by as comprehensive a list of its powers and properties as possible. The
difference is that where the initiate seeks to persuade and cajole, the sorcerer seeks to
bind and compel. There is no indication of accompanying music in the Hymns; however,
it would be a mistake to latch onto this omission and think there was no music. First of
all, the hymns themselves chanted properly constituted music. Perhaps that was enough
for the initiates. Percussion instruments are mentioned, but their appearance might be
due to their traditional associations. It is not easy to settle this question. Indic, Iranian,
and Muslim cult music should not be excluded from consideration. After all, all these
traditions use song as a bridge by which to unite heaven and earth. It should also be
recalled that Orpheus was famous as a poet and a singer in addition to being renowned
for his role as legendary founder of mystic rites.
We cannot recover the sounds and we do not know exactly what the mood was when
the Hymns were sung. It might not be too much to suggest that people gathered in places

that were sacred to them and that they did so as the softer colors of the evening were
settling in on them. Candles provided gentle light. Wisps of incense smoke rose into the
air. The magic of song, devotional, undulant, filled all of the sacred space and provoked
the human heart to seek union with the divine.
We know the past only through the present. My [A.N.A.] reconstruction of an Orphic
evening somewhere in Asia Minor is based on my experiences in the very mystical
services of the Orthodox Church. There is no effort here to show an absolutely direct
connection between the music of the Orthodox Church at present and the music of the
Orphic Hymns. However, burning incense, keeping time with the swing of the censer,
allowing sacred abandon to take over, and training the human voice to sink and then rise
to God cannot have changed much throughout the ages, especially within a culture
dominated by the same language and by the poetics of the same tradition.
On the whole, the style of the Hymns is homogenous and consistent. At the beginning of
each hymn, the invocation, sometimes several divinities are summoned. Usually the
name of the divinity or divinities is followed by an imperative, e.g., “Come! Hear!”
Variations are to be found in the end of the prayer that asks for blessing, peace,
prosperity, and wealth. There appears to be an order to the arrangement of most of the
hymns. There are many male/female pairings throughout.
 The opening ones focus on
the gods of the early generations and the theme of birth. Physis, Pan, and Herakles form
a triad that sums up the creation of the physical world. Kronos and Rhea lead to Zeus.
This begins a series of hymns where the traditional four elements of fire, air, water, and
earth provide a coherent structure (hymns 15–27). Everything leads to the first hymn to
Dionysos (hymn 30), his “birth” in a sense, which is strengthened by the appearance of
divinities connected with the Orphic myth of his birth, death, and rebirth (hymns 31–
38). A block of four hymns treats Eleusinian themes (hymns 40–43), and then comes
the central cluster of hymns treating Dionysian cult (hymns 44–54). Aphrodite seems to
preside over another series (hymns 55–68). A number of minor divinities, mostly in
pairs and all of cultic importance, continue to another grouping of hymns associated
with the elements (hymns 79–84). The three brothers Sleep, Dream, and Death end the
collection. For details, see the introductions to the various individual hymns. The ring
composition between birth at the beginning and death at the end is significant, and, if
the Hymns were performed throughout the night, the dawning of a new day would have
symbolically reflected the initiates' hopes for a new life, one that promised the reward of
eternal sunshine in the afterlife.
The Hymns are catalogues of religious epithets; such catalogues are intended to evoke
the many powers of various divinities that are significant to a particular type of religious
ideology and practice. The question is: what sources of ancient literature could have

inspired and instructed the writers of the Hymns? We have already indicated magical
incantations. Hesiod's catalogues of the daughters of Nereus and of the daughters of
Okeanos are religious documents (Theogony 240–264 and 346–363). Homer's catalogue
of the Nereids (Iliad 18.39–49) is a poetic construct, whose origin is religious. Hesiod's
catalogues come from an old religious tradition. A deity must be invoked by words that
refer to its attributes. In all likelihood the names of the daughters of Nereus and of the
daughters of Okeanos are in fact epithets of the sea, at times older than even Hesiod,
epithets that point to a Mother of the Waters. The sea has countless potencies, countless
faces. The sea is both a great blessing and a treacherous element that is fraught with
peril. The fact that great numbers of feminine divinities, essentially Daughters of the
Sea, so frequently rise out of the sea is indicative of a deeply entrenched and old
religious feeling that the  sea is feminine and  maternal,  a  huge  counterpart  to  the
masculine sky. Zeus is the Indo-European sky god. When people pray to him they also
pray to the sky. In a tradition that predates the arrival of the Greeks in Greece, the sea
and its in-dwelling divinities must have received more attention. The new religion that
emerged introduced a male god whose dominion became preeminent. The lists of the
daughters of Nereus and of Okeanos are prayer lists that come from an older religious
order. Every one of these names has a meaning. The following example is taken from
Hesiod's Theogony:
Proto, Eukrante, Amphitrite, and Sao,
Eudora, Thetis, Galene, and Glauke,
Kymothoe, Speio, Thoe, and lovely Halia,
Pasithea, Erato, and Eunike of the rosy arms. (243–46)
In an entirely literal translation:
First One, Mingling Gently, Water-Girt, and Savior,
Of the Good Gifts, Nurturing, Calm, and Grayish-Blue,
Of the Rushing Waves, Of the Numberless Caves, Swift, and lovely Sea,
Seen By All, Lovely, and Fair Victory of the rosy arms.
The first few lines from the hymn to Nereus offers a good example for comparison
(hymn 23.1–4):
The sea's foundations are your realm,
the abode of blue-black darkness,
you exult in the beauty
of your fifty daughters

as they dance amid the waves.
O Nereus, god of great renown,
O foundation of the sea, O end of the earth.
Even a casual look at these texts shows that they are religious texts that have one main
thing in common: they are strings of nouns or epithets addressed to a divinity. A first
approach to them leaves the reader puzzled as to their aesthetic, that is to say their
poetic value, as well as to their effectiveness. However, here is a suggestion to readers of
the Hesiodic catalogues as well as of the Orphic Hymns. They are asked to raise their
voices as they read to a pleasant and imposing pitch as well as a clear and rhythmically
punctuated vocalization of the lines. The tone of voice should strive to approximate
dignified chant. Examples are to be found in many cultures. If all this is done, the
religious character of the catalogues comes alive. They are no longer boring, and their
invocational nature becomes entirely clear.
Every Greek is aware that the Virgin Mary is addressed by various names that have
become sacred names. When I [A.N.A.] was working on the Hesiodic and Homeric
lists, I decided to find out just how many names were used to address the Virgin Mary
in the Hellenic world. I walked into a fine bookshop in Athens, and to my astonishment
I discovered four beautiful volumes devoted to an explanation of the nearly five hundred
names by which the Virgin Mary is addressed. This rich tradition may indeed ultimately
go back even to pre-Hellenic times. The idea suggested here is that the veneration of the
Virgin Mary has inherited aspects of the veneration of the sea and its divinities in
prehistoric time. Here is just a sample of names which refer to the Virgin Mary: She of
the Shoreline, She of the Sea Calm, the Far Heard One, She of the Seas, She of the
Lakes, She of the Harbors, She of the Caves, She of the Rivers, She of Good Sailing. It
should not be too difficult for anyone to hear in this sample echoes from Hesiod's
catalogues of the Nereids. The astonishing number of epithets to the Virgin Mary in the
Hellenic lands should not be regarded as some sort of random religious occurrence.
Whether the attributes of a divinity are described by epithets, nouns, or periphrastic
expressions makes no substantial difference. Relevant here from the Judaic tradition is
Exodus 34:6–7 in which God Himself speaks of his own attributes. Muslims believe in
one God whose divine qualities are known to them by ninety-nine (some say more)
different names.
  Numbers  12–19  in  Siddiqi  read  as  follows:  The  Rightful  /  The
Fashioner  of  Forms  /  The  Ever-Forgiving  /  The  All-Compelling  Subduer  /  The
Bestower / The Ever-Providing / The Opener / The Victory-Giver / The All-Knowing.
However, these sacred names appear throughout the Koran and in this respect they do
not resemble the Hesiodic catalogues or the Orphic Hymns. It is not so much the
semantic content as the tone and cumulative effect of this religious utterance that opens
possibilities of comparison with the Hymns. The emotionally powerful, indeed ecstatic

and repetitive, invocation of Allah by the Whirling Dervishes of the Mevlevi Order
dominates the performance of their rituals. The ninety-nine names of Allah are recited
in their daily prayers and meditations. Such practices cannot be so very different from
the concept and practice of unceasing prayer, such as the Jesus Prayer, so central to the
monastic life of Mount Athos. The religious life of the Whirling Dervishes owes its
origins to Rumi, a Persian poet who was also an Islamic jurist and theologian. His
spiritual teachings took root in Konya, Turkey, not too far from ancient Pergamum, the
city that may have produced the Orphic Hymns. If we call all this a chain of similar
religious phenomena, even a coincidental one, we may come closer to understanding the
power of clustering epithets for the creation of an emotional and physical crescendo that
might raise our human spirit and help us approach the divine.
There are lines in the Orphic Hymns that remind one of the Vedic hymns. For
example, from one to Soma: “King Soma, be gracious to us for welfare; / we are thy
devotees: know that. / There arise might and wrath O Indu: / abandon us not according
to the desire of our foe.”
 Is this not in both spirit and formulation similar to the way
practically all the hymns of our collection end? Consider also: “So, O Agni, be easy of
access to us / as a father to his son; abide with us / for our well-being.”
 Winthrop
Sargeant in his translation of the Bhagavad gita has an impressive list of epithets used in
this great poetic monument. Here is only a handful from his list: The Bristling-haired
One, the Imperishable One, the Immeasurable One, Incomparable Glory, Conqueror of
Wealth,  the  Blameless  One.
  Among  the  Finnic peoples—the  Saami—almost
throughout the entire sub-Arctic zone the bear is a very sacred animal, rich in lore and
ritual. The primordial bear, more often Father Bear, but then also Mother Bear in
various creation stories, is of celestial origin. I [A.N.A.] feel very fortunate that in 1I became friends with Juha Pentikäinen, a great Finnish scholar who introduced me not
only to a new perspective of the Kalevala but also to rare information on the centrality
and importance of the bear in the religion and social life of the Finnic peoples. Several
years later in 2006, I attended a conference titled “In the Footsteps of the Bear” in Pori,
Finland. The proceedings of the conference were published in Pori in 2006 under the
title In the Footsteps of the Bear.
 It was in Pori that I learned from Juha and some of his
eminent international colleagues that nearly five hundred names are used in the vast sub-
Arctic zone to address “the golden king of the forest.” Here are some examples: Forest
Gold (or simply Darling), Forest Beauty, Graceful Mistress of the Forest.
The Orphic  Hymns  name  specific  pagan  divinities,  yet  they  appeal  to  universal
spiritual powers. Some of them, like the hymns to Dream, Death, and Sleep, are in
essence prayers that could be offered to God regardless of specific faith. All this makes
excellent sense. The years between 300 and 500 AD were years of transition. It is very
naïve to think that the Christian faith simply walked into towns, villages, and hamlets to
be triumphantly received. It is much likelier that the new faith made accommodations

with places and associations that cultivated the spiritual values. The new faith lacked the
language of expressing the new spiritual values. The old faith, especially as expressed in
documents like the Hymns, possessed a liturgical language ready to be used. Echoes of
the compositional mode of the Hymns, especially of the effect of clustering epithets, can
occasionally be heard in the great devotional and, at the same time invocational, Hymns
of  the  Orthodox  Church,  such  as  the Akathistos  Hymnos:  “Spotless,  pollutionless,
incorruptible, untouched, pure Virgin, Despoina, Bride of God.”
The Orphic Hymns, as well as similar hymns, have neither plot nor action. They are
not at all like the major Homeric hymns in that they do not appeal to any emotion. None
of our hymns shows even a trace of humor, rhetorical conceit, or for that matter a desire
to delight or shock the initiates. Clearly, elevation of mood and the powerful affirmation
of a meaningful and bonding presence are elements that run through the recitation of
mighty words and sacred sounds flowing into the eager ears and souls of the faithful.
Even the puns serve this purpose. Names chanted or better yet sung or even simply
recited in a particular sacred tone have power. Each epithet reverberates into the mind
of the celebrant and spins out its own plot and its own action. As one epithet follows
another, chains of meaning and sound acquire a power that may exceed that of a highly
structured narrative. One name is one thing. Two names are more than two things. The
Orphic Hymns are beautiful poetry of another kind, a transcendental kind, which must
be understood in the context of its own conventions.

THE ORPHIC HYMNS

Orpheus to Mousaios
Friend, use it to good fortune.
Learn now, Mousaios,
a mystical and most holy rite,
a prayer which surely
excels all others.
Kind Zeus and Earth,heavenly and pure flames of Sun,
sacred light of Moon,
and of all the Stars;
Poseidon, too,
dark-maned holder of the earth,
pure Persephone,Demeter of the splendid fruit,
Artemis, arrow-pouring maiden,
kindly Phoibos,
dwelling on the sacred ground of Delphoi,
and Dionysos, the dancer,
whose honors among the blessed gods   are the highest;
strong-spirited Ares,
holy and mighty Hephaistos,
then the goddess foam-born,
to whose lot fell sublime gifts,
and you, divinity excellent,king of the underworld.
I call on Hebe, and Eileithyia,
and the noble ardor of Herakles,

I call upon the great blessings
of Justice and Piety,
I call upon the glorious Nymphsand upon Pan the greatest,
I call upon Hera,
buxom wife of aegis-bearing Zeus.
And I call upon lovely Mnemosyne,
I call upon the holy Muses,
all nine, and then I call upon the Graces, the Seasons, and the Year,
upon fair-tressed Leto,
and upon divine and revered Dione.
I invoke the armed Kouretes,
the Korybantes, and the Kabeiroi,
the great Saviors,Zeus' ageless scions,
I invoke the Idaian gods, and Hermes,
messenger and herald.
Of those in the sky,
I invoke Themis, diviner of men,
and then I invoke Night, oldest of all,  and I do invoke light-bringing Day.
Faith, Dike, I invoke,
I invoke blameless Thesmodoteira,
and Rhea, and Kronos,
and dark-veiled Tethys,
the great Okeanos,and all of his daughters.
I invoke the might preeminent
of Atlas and Aion,

of Time the ever-flowing,
and of the splendid water of the Styx.
I call on all these gentle gods,and I call on Pronoia,
and on the holy Daimon,
I also call on Daimon baneful to mortals,
then I invoke divinities dwelling
in the sky, in the air, in the water,
on earth, under the earth,and in the fiery element.
Ino, Leukothea,
Palaimon, giver of bliss,
sweet-speaking Nike,
queenly Adrasteia,
I call upon the great king Asklepios,   who grants soothing,
upon the battle-stirring maiden Pallas,
and upon all the winds,
I call upon Thunder, and upon the parts
of the four-pillared cosmos.
I invoke the Mother of the immortals,  Attis and Men,
I invoke the goddess Ourania,
and the immortal and holy Adonis,
Beginning and End, too,
which to all is most important,
and I ask them to comein a spirit of joyous mercy
to this holy rite,
to this reverent libation.

1. To Hekate
Lovely Hekate of the roads
and of the crossroads I invoke.
In heaven, on earth,
then in the sea, saffron-cloaked,
tomb spirit revelingin the souls of the dead,
daughter of Perses, haunting deserted places,
delighting in deer,
nocturnal, dog-loving,
monstrous queen,
devouring wild beasts,ungirt and repulsive.
Herder of bulls,
queen and mistress of the whole world,
leader, nymph,
mountain-roaming nurturer of youths,
maiden, I beseech you to cometo these holy rites,
ever with joyous heart,
ever favoring the oxherd.

2. To Prothyraia
incense—storax
Hear me, O revered goddess,
O many-named divinity,
O sight sweet to women in labor,
you offer them aid in travail.
You save women, and you alonelove children,
O kindly goddess
of swift birth, ever helpful to young women,
O Prothyraia.
You hold the keys,
you are accessible to all, O mistress,gracious and fond of nurture,
you have power in every house,
and you delight in festivities.
You loosen girdles, and though invisible
you are seen in every deed,
you share pain,you rejoice in every birth,
O Eileithyia, you free from pain
those in terrible distress.
Upon you alone pregnant women call,
O comforter of souls,
and in you alone there isrelief from pains of labor.
Artemis, Eileithyia,
reverend Prothyraia,

hear, O blessed one,
help me and grant offspring;
save me, savior of all,for it is in your nature to do so.

3. To Night
incense—firebrands
I shall sing of Night,
mother of gods and men;
we call Night Kypris,
she gave birth to all.
Hear, O blessed goddess,jet-black and starlit,
for you delight in the quiet
and slumber-filled serenity.
Cheerful and delightful, lover
of the nightlong revel, mother of dreams,
you free us from cares,you offer us welcome respite from toil.
Giver of sleep, beloved of all,
you gleam in the darkness as you drive your steeds.
Ever incomplete, terrestrial,
and then again celestial,
you circle around in pursuitof sprightly phantoms,
you force light into the nether world,
and then again you flee
into Hades, for dreadful Necessity
governs all things.
But now, O blessed one—beatific,desired by all—I call on you
to grant a kind ear
to my voice of supplication,

and to come, benevolent,
to disperse fears that glisten in the night.

4. To Sky
incense—frankincense
Sky, father of all,
eternal cosmic element,
primeval beginning of all,
end of all,
lord of the universe,moving about the earth like a sphere.
You are home of the blessed gods,
your motion is a roaring whirl,
you envelop all,
celestial and terrestrial guard.
Physis' invincible drivelies in your breast.
Dark-blue, indomitable,
shimmering, variform,
all-seeing father of Kronos,
blessed and most sublime divinity,
hearken, bring a life of holiness   to the new initiates.

5. To Ether
incense—crocus
Yours are Zeus' lofty dwelling,
endless power, too;
of the stars, of the sun,
and of the moon you claim a share.
O tamer of all, O fire-breather,  O life's spark for every creature,
sublime Ether,
best cosmic element,
radiant, luminous,
starlit offspring,
I call upon you and I beseech you to be temperate and clear.

6. To Protogonos
incense—myrrh
Upon two-natured Protogonos,
great and ether-tossed, I call;
born of the egg,
delighting in his golden wings,
the begetter of blessed gods and mortal men;he bellows like a bull.
Erikepaios, seed unforgettable,
attended by many rites,
ineffable, hidden, brilliant scion,
forever in whirring motion,
you scattered the dark mist,the mist that lay before your eyes.
Flapping your wings, you whirled about
throughout this world,
you brought pure light.
For this I call you Phanes,
yes, I call you Lord Priapos,I call you bright-eyed Antauges.
O blessed one of the many counsels
and of the many seeds, come joyfully
to the celebrants of this holy rite,
of this very intricate rite.

7. To the Stars
incense—aromatic herbs
I call forth the sacred light
of the heavenly Stars,
with devotional prayers
I summon the holy daimones.
Heavenly Stars,dear children of black Night,
round your thrones you move in circles,
you spin in circular ways,
O brilliant and fiery
begetters of all,
you do reveal fate,everyone's fate,
you determine the divine path
for mortals.
Wandering in midair, you gaze
upon the seven luminous orbits.
In heaven and on earth, ever indestructible on your blazing trail,
you shine upon the darkness
of the cloak night wears.
Coruscating and gleaming,
kingly and nocturnal,
visit the learned contestsof this sacred rite,
finish a noble race
for works of renown.

8. To the Sun
incense—pounded frankincense
Hear me, O blessed one,
eternal eye that sees all,
Titan radiant as gold,
Hyperion, celestial light,
self-born, untiring,sweet sight to living creatures.
On the right you beget dawn,
on the left you beget night,
you temper the seasons
as you ride your dancing horses,
you rush, you rush very swiftly,O fiery and bright-faced charioteer,
you press on your course
in endless whirl.
Harsh to the impious,
you teach good to the pious
as you hold the golden lyre,the harmony of cosmic motion,
as you command noble deeds,
as you nurture the seasons.
Piping lord of the world,
fiery circle of motion,
life-bringing, coruscating,life-giving, fruit-bearing, Paian,
eternal and pure father of time,
O immortal Zeus,

you are the clear, you are the brilliant,
you are the all-encompassing cosmic eye,
both when you set and when you shine  your lovely and radiant light.
A paragon of justice,
O water-loving lord of the cosmos,
you guard pledges and ever the highest,
you do help all.
Eye of justice and light of life,O charioteer,
your screaming whip
drives the four-horse chariot on.
Hear my words and show
life's sweetness to the initiates.

9. To Selene
incense—aromatic herbs
Hear me, O divine queen,
O light-bringing and splendid Selene,
O bull-horned Moon,
crossing the air as you race with night.
Nocturnal, torch-bearing,maiden of beautiful stars, O Moon,
waxing and waning,
feminine and masculine,
luminous, lover of horses,
mother of time, bearer of fruit,
amber-colored, moody,shining in the night,
all-seeing and vigilant,
surrounded by beautiful stars,
you delight in the quiet
and in the richness of the night,
you grant fulfillment and favoras, like a jewel, you shine in the night.
Long-cloaked marshal of the stars,
wise maiden whose motion is circular,
come, O blessed and gentle lady,
lady of the stars, through your own light
shine and save, O maiden,your new initiates.

10. To Physis
incense—aromatic herbs
O Physis,
resourceful mother of all,
industrious and rich divinity,
oldest of all, queen,
all-taming and indomitable,O lustrous ruler,
ever-honored mistress of all,
highest goddess,
imperishable, first-born,
fabled glorifier of men,
nocturnal, radiant with constellations,  light-bringing, irrepressible,
you move swiftly,
your steps are noiseless,
O pure marshal of the gods,
O end that has no end.
All partake of you,you alone partake of no one.
Self-fathered, hence fatherless,
virtue itself, joyous, great,
you are accessible, O nurse of flowers,
you lovingly mingle and twine,
you lead and rule,you bring life and nourishment to all.
Self-sufficient,
many-named persuasion of the Graces,

Dike herself, queen of heaven,
queen of the earth and of the sea,
bitter to the vulgar,sweet to those who obey you,
wise in all, giver of all,
nurturing queen of all,
abundant nourishment is yours
as you dissolve whatever ripens,
father and mother of all,nurturer and nurse,
giver of swift birth, O blessed one,
giver of wealth of seeds
and of the fever of seasons.
A rich and mighty divinity,
you give shape and form to all things.  Eternal, setting all in motion,
skilled and discreet,
you are ever turning the swift stream
into an unceasing eddy,
flowing in all things,
circular and ever changing form,fair-throned and precious,
you alone accomplish your designs,
mighty mistress of booming thunder,
you rule over those who hold the scepter,
O loud-roaring divinity,
fearless, all-taming,destined fate, fire-breathing,
you are life everlasting,
you are immortal providence.

You are all things to all,
because you alone do.
You are the all,you alone do,
you bring peace and health,
you bring growth to all.

11. To Pan
incense—et varia
I call upon Pan, the pastoral god,
I call upon the universe,
upon the sky, the sea, and the land,
queen of all,
I also call upon immortal fire;all these are Pan's realm.
Come, O blessed and frolicsome one,
O restless companion of the Seasons!
Goat-limbed, reveling,
lover of frenzy, star-haunting,
weaver of playful song,song of cosmic harmony,
you induce fantasies of dread
into the minds of mortals,
you delight in gushing springs,
surrounded by goatherds and oxherds,
you dance with the nymphs,you sharp-eyed hunter, lover of Echo.
Present in all growth, begetter of all,
many-named divinity,
light-bringing lord of the cosmos,
fructifying Paian,
cave-loving and wrathful,veritable Zeus with horns,
the earth's endless plain
is supported by you,

and the deep-flowing water
of the weariless sea yields to you.
Okeanos who girds the earthwith his eddying stream gives way to you,
and so does the air we breathe,
the air that kindles all life,
and above us the sublime eye
of weightless fire;
at your behestall these are kept wide apart.
Your providence alters
the natures of all,
on the boundless earth you offer
nourishment to mankind.
Come, frenzy-loving, spirit-possessed,  come to these sacred libations,
come and bring my life
to a good end.
Send your madness, O Pan,
to the ends of the earth.

12. To Herakles
incense—frankincense
Herakles, stout-hearted and mighty,
powerful Titan,
strong-handed, indomitable,
doer of valiant deeds,
shape-shifter,O gentle and endless father of time,
ineffable, lord of all,
many pray to you,
all-conquering and mighty
archer and seer,
omnivorous begetter of all,peak of all, helper to all,
for the sake of men
you subdued and tamed savage races.
Peace was your desire;
she brings dazzling honors and nurtures youths.
Self-grown, weariless,bravest child of the earth,
O illustrious Paion,
your primordial scales gleam.
Round your head
dawn and dark night cling,
and your twelve deeds of valorstretch from east to west.
Immortal, world-wise,
boundless and irrepressible,

come, O blessed one,
bringing all charms against disease,
with club in handdrive evil bane away,
with your poisonous darts
do ward off cruel death.

13. To Kronos
incense—storax
Everlasting father
of blessed gods and men,
resourceful, pure and mighty,
O powerful Titan,
you consume all thingsand replenish them, too.
Unbreakable is the hold you have
on the boundless cosmos,
O Kronos, begetter of time,
Kronos of the shifting stories,
child of Earth,child of starry Sky.
In you there is birth and decline,
O revered and prudent lord of Rhea,
you are the progenitor,
you dwell in every part of the world.
I am a suppliant, hear my voice,  O wily and brave one,
and to a good life
bring a blameless end.

14. To Rhea
incense—aromatic herbs
Mighty Rhea,
daughter of many-faced Protogonos,
your sacred chariot is drawn
by bull-slayers,
you dance to the sound of drums and cymbals, O frenzy-loving maiden,
O mother of Zeus,
aegis-bearing lord of Olympos.
Illustrious and honored,
Kronos' blessed consort,
you delight in the mountainsand in the horrid shrieks of mortals.
Strong-spirited Rhea, queen of queens,
lover of the battle din,
liar, savior, redeemer,
first by birth, mother of gods
and of mortals,from you come the earth,
and the wide sky above,
and the sea and the winds.
Ethereal and restless, come,
O blessed goddess,
O gentle-minded savior,come, bring peace and wealth
and abundance of possessions,
and do send death and the filth of pollution

to the ends of the earth.

15. To Zeus
incense—storax
Much-honored Zeus, great god,
indestructible Zeus,
we lay before you in prayer
redeeming testimony.
O king, you have brought to light   divine works—
earth, goddess and mother,
the hills swept by the shrill winds,
the sea and the host of the stars,
marshaled by the sky.
Kronian Zeus, strong-spirited god,   the thunderbolt is your scepter,
father of all,
beginning and end of all,
earth-shaker, increaser
and purifier, all-shaker,
god of thunder and lightning,Zeus the sower.
Hear me, god of many faces,
grant me unblemished health,
please grant me divine peace and riches,
please grant me glory without blame.

16. To Hera
incense—aromatic herbs
You lodge yourself in dark hollows,
and your form is airy,
O Hera, blessed queen of all,
consort of Zeus.
The soft breezes you send to mortals  nourish the soul,
O mother of rains, mother of the winds,
you give birth to all.
Life does not exist without you,
growth does not exist without you.
You are in everything,even in the air we venerate,
you are queen,
and you are mistress.
You toss and turn
when the rushing wind tosses and turns.
O blessed goddess,many-named queen of all,
may you come with kindness
on your joyous face.

17. To Poseidon
incense—myrrh
Hearken, dark-maned Poseidon,
holder of the earth,
horse god, you hold
the bronze trident in your hand,
you dwell in the foundationsof the full-bosomed sea.
Shaker of the earth,
deep-roaring ruler of the waters,
the waves are your blossoms, O gracious one,
as you urge horses and chariots on,
rushing on the sea,splashing through the rippling brine.
The unfathomable sea
fell to your lot, the third portion.
Waves and their wild dwellers please you,
O spirit of the deep.
May you save the foundations of the earth  and ships moving at full tilt,
bringing peace, health,
and blameless prosperity.

18. To Plouton
You dwell below the earth,
O strong-spirited one,
a meadow in Tartaros,
thick-shaded and dark.
Sceptered Chthonic Zeus,please accept this sacrifice,
O Plouton, holder of the keys
to the whole earth.
To mankind you give
the wealth of the year's fruits,
yours is the third portion,earth, queen of all,
seat of the gods,
mighty lap of mortals.
Your throne rests
on a dark realm,
the realm of distant, of untiring,of windless, and of impassive Hades;
it does rest on gloomy Acheron,
the river who girds the roots of the earth.
All-receiver, master of death,
master of mortals, host of many,
Euboulos, you once took as your bride  pure Demeter's daughter:
you tore her away from the meadow,
and through the sea
you carried her to an Attic cave
upon your steeds—

it was the district of Eleusis,where the gates to Hades are.
You alone were born to judge
deeds obscure and conspicuous.
Holiest and illustrious ruler of all,
frenzied god,
you delight in the respectand in the reverence of your worshippers.
I summon you, come with favor,
come with joy to the initiates.

19. To Zeus the Thunderbolt
incense—storax
Father Zeus, sublime is the course
of the blazing cosmos you drive on,
ethereal and lofty
the flash of your lightning
as you shake the seat of the gods   with a god's thunderbolts.
The fire of your lightning
emblazons the rain clouds,
you bring storms and hurricanes,
you bring mighty gales,
you hurl roaring thunder,a shower of arrows.
Horrific might and strength
sets all aflame,
dreadful missile
makes hearts pound and hair bristle.
Holy and invincible,it comes with a sudden crash,
an endless spiral of noise,
omnivorous in its drive,
unbreakable and threatening,
ineluctable, too, the gale's
sharp and smoke-filled shaftsswoop down
with a flash dreaded
by land and sea.

Wild beasts cringe
when they hear the noise,
faces reflect the brillianceof thunder roaring
in the celestial hollows.
You tear the robe
that cloaks heaven,
you hurl the fiery thunderbolt.
O blessed one ...the anger of the sea waves,
the anger of the mountain peaks—
we all know your power.
Enjoy this libation and give all things
pleasing to the heart:
a life of prosperity,queenly health,
divine peace that nurtures youths,
crowned with honors,
a life ever blooming
with cheerful thoughts.

20. To Astrapaios Zeus
incense—powdered frankincense
I call upon great and pure,
upon resounding and illustrious,
upon ethereal and blazing Zeus,
whose racing fire shines through the air.
Your light flashes through the clouds  with an ear-splitting clap.
O horrid, O wrathful and pure,
O invincible god,
lord of lightning, I call upon you,
O begetter of all, O great king,
to be kind and to bringa sweet end to my life.

21. To the Clouds
incense—myrrh
Airy Clouds, you nourish fruits
and rove the sky,
you bring rain as you are driven
everywhere by the wind.
Filled with blazing thunder,filled with water, you resound
with awesome crashes
in the air-filled vault of heaven
as you are repelled
by the attack of raging winds.
To you I offer my prayers:your dewy cloaks, blown by fair breezes,
send fruit-nourishing rains
to mother Earth.

22. To the Sea
incense—pounded frankincense
I call upon gray-eyed Tethys,
bride of Okeanos,
dark-veiled queen
whose waves dance
as they are blown onto the landby the sweet breezes.
You break your tall waves
upon the rocky beaches,
you are calmed by races
that are gentle and smooth,
you delight in ships,your waters feed wild beasts.
Mother of Kypris,
mother of dark clouds,
mother of every spring
round which nymphs swarm,
hear me, O holy one,please help,
send a fair tail wind to ships,
O blessed one.

23. To Nereus
incense—myrrh
The sea's foundations are your realm,
the abode of blue-black darkness,
you exult in the beauty
of your fifty daughters
as they dance amid the waves.O Nereus, god of great renown,
O foundation of the sea, O end of the earth,
O beginning of all,
Demeter's sacred throne trembles
when you hold prisoner
the gusty winds drivento your gloomy depths.
O blessed one,
ward off earthquakes and send
to the initiates peace and prosperity
and gentle-handed health.

24. To the Nereids
incense—aromatic herbs
O lovely-faced and pure nymphs,
daughters of Nereus, lord of the deep,
at the bottom of the sea
you frolic and dance,
fifty maidens revel in the waves,   maidens riding on the backs of Tritons,
delighting in animal shapes,
bodies nurtured by the sea,
and in the other dwellers
of Triton's billowy kingdom.
Your home is the water,you leap and whirl round the waves
like glistening dolphins
roving the roaring seas.
I call upon you to bring
much prosperity to the initiates,
for you were firstto show the holy rite
of sacred Bacchos
and of pure Persephone,
you and mother Kalliope
and Apollon the lord.

25. To Proteus
incense—storax
I call upon Proteus,
key-holding master of the sea,
first-born, who showed
the beginnings of all nature,
changing matterinto a great variety of forms.
Honored by all, he is wise,
and he knows what is now,
what was before,
and what will be in the future.
He has all at his disposal,transformed far beyond
all other immortals
who dwell on snowy Olympos
and fly through the air
and over land and sea,
for Physis was the first to place   everything in Proteus.
Father, attended by holy providence,
visit the mystic initiates,
and bring a good end to a life
of industry and prosperity.

26. To Earth
incense, any grain save beans, and aromatic herbs
Divine Earth, mother of men
and of the blessed gods,
you nourish all, you give all,
you bring all to fruition, you destroy all.
When the season is fair, you teem   with fruit and growing blossoms,
O multi-formed maiden,
seat of the immortal cosmos,
in the pains of labor
you bring forth all fruit.
Eternal, revered,deep-bosomed and blessed,
your joy is the sweet breath of grass,
O goddess bedecked with flowers,
yours is the joy of the rain,
the intricate realm of the stars
revolves in endlessand awesome flow.
O blessed goddess,
may you multiply the delicious fruits,
and may you and the beautiful Seasons
grant me kindly favor.

27. To the Mother of the Gods
incense—et varia
Divine are your honors, O mother
of the gods and nurturer of all.
Yoke your swift chariot
drawn by bull-slaying lions,
and join our prayers, O mighty goddess.  You bring things to pass,
O many-named and revered one,
you are queen of the sky;
in the cosmos yours is the throne,
the throne in the middle,
because the earth is yours,and you give gentle nourishment to mortals.
Of you were born
gods and men,
you hold sway
over the rivers and over all the sea.
Hestia is one of your names,they call you giver of prosperity,
because you bestow on men
all manner of blessings.
Come to this rite,
queen whom the drum delights,
all-taming savior of Phrygia,consort of Kronos,
honored child of Sky,
frenzy-loving nurturer of life,
joyously and graciously
visit our deeds of piety.

28. To Hermes
incense—frankincense
Hear me, Hermes,
messenger of Zeus, son of Maia,
almighty in heart, lord of the deceased,
judge of contests,
gentle and clever, O Argeiphontes,   you are the guide
of the flying sandals,
a man-loving prophet to mortals.
A vigorous god, you delight
in exercise and in deceit.
Interpreter of all you areand a profiteer who frees us of cares,
who holds in his hands
the blameless tool of peace.
Lord of Korykos, blessed,
helpful, and skilled in words,
you assist in work and you area friend of mortals in need.
You wield the dreaded, the respected
weapon of speech.
Hear my prayer and grant
a good end to a life of industry,
gracious talk,and mindfulness.

29. Hymn to Persephone
Persephone, blessed daughter
of great Zeus, sole offspring
of Demeter, come and accept
this gracious sacrifice.
Much-honored spouse of Plouton,discreet and life-giving,
you command the gates of Hades
in the bowels of the earth,
lovely-tressed Praxidike,
pure bloom of Deo,
mother of the Erinyes,queen of the nether world,
secretly sired by Zeus
in clandestine union.
Mother of loud-roaring,
many-shaped Eubouleus,
radiant and luminous,playmate of the Seasons,
revered and almighty,
maiden rich in fruits,
brilliant and horned,
only-beloved of mortals,
in spring you take your joyin the meadow of breezes,
you show your holy figure
in branches teeming with grass-green fruits,
in autumn you were made
a kidnapper's bride.

You alone are life and death to toiling mortals,
O Persephone, you nourish all,
always, and kill them, too.
Hearken, O blessed goddess,
send forth the fruits of the earth
as you blossom in peace,and in gentle-handed health
bring a blessed life
and a splendid old age to him who is sailing
to your realm, O queen,
and to mighty Plouton's kingdom.

30. To Dionysos
incense—storax
I call upon loud-roaring,
reveling Dionysos,
primeval, two-natured,
thrice-born Bacchic lord,
savage, ineffable, secretive,two-horned and two-shaped,
ivy-covered, bull-faced,
warlike, howling, pure.
You take raw flesh in triennial feasts,
wrapped in foliage, decked with grape clusters,
resourceful Eubouleus,immortal god sired by Zeus
when he mated with Persephone
in unspeakable union.
Hearken to my voice, O blessed one,
you and your fair-girdled nurses,
breathe on me in a spiritof perfect kindness.

31. Hymn to the Kouretes
Leaping Kouretes,
stepping to the sound of arms,
howling mountain men
whose feet pound the ground,
discordant is the lyre you strikeas you pace, light of foot,
O renowned marshals,
O arm-carrying guards,
priests in the train of a mother
struck with mountain frenzy.
Kindly visit the peoplewho praise you with words,
with joyous heart
be gracious to the oxherd.

32. To Athene
incense—aromatic herbs
Reverend Pallas,
great Zeus bore you by himself,
noble and blessed goddess,
brave in the din of war.
Renowned and cave-haunting,spoken of and then ineffable,
your domain is
on wind-swept hilltops,
shaded mountains,
dells that charm your heart.
Arms please you, and you strike men's soulswith frenzy,
O vigorous maiden,
O horrid-tempered one,
slayer of Gorgo, O blessed mother of the arts,
you shun the bed of love,
you bring madness to the wicked,you bring prudence to the virtuous, O impetuous one.
Male and female,
shrewd begetter of war,
she-dragon of the many shapes,
frenzy-loving, illustrious,
destroyer of the Phlegraian Giants,driver of horses,
victorious Tritogeneia,
O goddess, you free us from suffering,

day and night,
ever into the small hours.
Hear my prayer and give mea full measure of peace,
of riches, and of health,
accompanied by happy seasons,
O gray-eyed and inventive queen,
to whom many offer their prayers.

33. To Nike
incense—powdered frankincense
I call upon mighty Nike,
beloved of mortals;
she alone frees man
from the eagerness for contest,
from dissent,when men face each other in battle.
In war you are the judge
of deeds deserving prizes;
sweet is the boast
you grant after the onslaught.
Nike, mistress of all,on your good name depends noble glory,
glory that comes from the strife
and teems with festivities.
O blessed and beloved one,
come with joy in your eyes,
come for works of renown,bring me noble glory.

34. To Apollon
incense—powdered frankincense
Come, O blessed Paian, O slayer of Tityos,
O Phoibos, O Lykoreus,
giver of riches, illustrious dweller of Memphis,
O god to whom we cry “Ië,”
O Titan and Pythian god,yours are
the golden lyre, the seeds, and the plows.
Grynean, Sminthian, slayer of Python,
Delphic diviner, wild, light-bringing,
lovable god you are, O glorious youth.
You shoot your arrows from afar,you lead the Muses into dance,
O holy one, you are Bacchos,
Didymeus, Loxias, too,
lord of Delos, you are the eye that sees all,
you bring light to mortals,
your hair is golden,your oracular utterance is clear.
Hear me with kindly heart
as I pray for people.
You gaze upon all
the ethereal vastness,
upon the rich earth you lookthrough the twilight.
In the quiet darkness
of a night lit with stars

you see earth's roots below,
you hold the bounds
of the whole world;the beginning and the end to come are yours.
You make everything bloom
with your versatile lyre,
you harmonize the poles,
now reaching the highest pitch,
now the lowest,now again with a Doric mode,
harmoniously balancing the poles,
you keep the living races distinct.
You have infused harmony
into the lot of all men,
giving them an equal measureof winter and summer:
the lowest notes you strike in the winter,
the highest notes you make distinct in the summer,
your mode is Doric
for spring's lovely and blooming season.
This is why mortals call youlord and Pan,
the two-horned god
who sends the whistling winds;
it is for this you have
the master seal of the entire cosmos.
O blessed one, hear the suppliant voiceof the initiates and save them.

35. To Leto
incense—myrrh
Dark-veiled Leto, revered goddess,
mother of twins,
great-souled daughter of Koios,
queen to whom many pray,
to your lot fell the birth pains   for Zeus' fair children,
you bore Phoibos
and arrow-pouring Artemis,
her on Ortygia,
him on rocky Delos.
Hear, lady goddess,come with favor in your heart
to bring a sweet end
to this all-holy rite.

36. To Artemis
incense—powdered frankincense
Hear me, O queen,
Zeus' daughter of many names,
Titanic and Bacchic,
revered, renowned archer,
torch-bearing goddess bringing light to all,  Diktynna, helper at childbirth,
you help women in labor,
though you know not what labor is.
O frenzy-loving huntress,
you loosen girdles and drive distress away;
swift arrow-pouring goddess of the outdoors, you roam in the night.
Fame-bringing and affable,
redeeming and masculine in appearance,
Orthia, goddess of swift birth,
you are a nurturer of mortal youths,
immortal and yet of this earth,you slay wild beasts, O blessed one,
your realm is in the mountain forest,
you hunt deer.
O revered and mighty queen of all,
fair-blossomed, eternal,
sylvan, dog-loving,many-shaped lady of Kydonia,
come, dear goddess,
as savior to all the initiates,

accessible to all, bringing forth
the beautiful fruit of the earth,
lovely peace,and fair-tressed health.
May you dispatch diseases and pain
to the peaks of the mountains.

37. To the Titans
incense—frankincense
Titans, glorious children
of Sky and Earth,
ancestors of our fathers,
you dwell down below
in Tartarean homes,in the bowels of the earth.
From you are descended
all toiling mortals,
the brood of the sea and of the land,
then the brood of the birds,
of all generationsof the world born of you.
I call upon you
to banish harsh anger
if some earthly forefather of mine
stormed your homes.

38. To the Kouretes
incense—frankincense
Bronze-beating Kouretes,
the weapons of Ares are yours.
Dwellers of heaven, of earth and sea,
thrice-blessed ones,
life-giving breezes,glorious saviors of the world,
you dwell in the sacred land
of Samothrace,
you ward off dangers
for mortals roaming the seas,
you were first to set upsacred rites for mortals.
O immortal Kouretes,
the weapons of Ares are yours.
You rule Okeanos,
you rule the sea and the forests,
the earth resounds with the poundingof your nimble feet,
and with the glories in your gleaming armor.
All wild beasts cringe
at your onrush,
the din and the shouts rise heavenward,
the dust from your feet,as you march briskly,
reaches the clouds;
every flower is in bloom.

Immortal gods, you nurture,
you also destroy
when you fret angrilyover mankind,
you ruin livelihoods and possessions,
you ruin men themselves.
... the great deep-eddying
sea groans,
lofty trees are uprooted,they fall upon the earth,
the noisy tremor of the leaves
echoes in the sky.
Kouretes, Korybantes,
mighty lords,
masters of Samothrace,true Dioskouroi,
ever-blowing breezes,
soul-nurturing and airy,
you're called celestial twins
on Olympos.
Gentle saviors, you bringfair breezes and clear weather,
nurturers of seasons and of fruits,
breathe upon us, O lords.

39. To Korybas
incense—frankincense
I call upon the greatest king
of eternal earth,
blessed Korybas, the warlike,
the one of the forbidding countenance,
the nocturnal Koureswho saves us from dreadful fear.
Korybas, you save us from fantasies
as you wander in deserted places.
Many are the shapes, O lord,
of your twofold divinity;
your blood is taintedwith the murder of twin brothers.
You follow Deo's thinking,
you changed your holy form
into the shape of a savage,
dark dragon.
O blessed one, hear our voices,    banish harsh anger,
free from fantasies
souls stunned by compulsions.

40. To Eleusinian Demeter
incense—storax
Deo, divine mother of all,
goddess of many names,
revered Demeter, nurturer of youths,
giver of prosperity and wealth,
you nourish the ears of corn,O giver of all,
you delight in peace
and in toilsome labor.
Present at sowing, heaping, and threshing,
O spirit of the unripe fruit,
you dwellin the sacred valley of Eleusis.
Charming and lovely,
you give sustenance to all mortals;
you were the first to yoke
the ploughing ox,
the first to send up from below a rich,a lovely harvest for mortals.
You are growth and blooming,
O illustrious companion of Bromios,
torch-bearing and pure,
you delight in the summer's yield.
From beneath the earth you appear,gentle to all,
O holy and youth-nurturing lover
of children and of fair offspring.

You yoke your chariot
to bridled dragons,
round your throneyou whirl and howl in ecstasy.
You are an only daughter, but you have many children
and many powers over mortals;
the variety of flowers reflect
your myriad faces and your sacred blossoms.
Come, O blessed and pure one,come with the fruits of summer,
bring peace,
bring the welcome rule of law,
bring riches, too, and prosperity,
and bring health that governs all.

41. To Mother Antaia
incense—aromatic herbs
Queen Antaia,
goddess and many-named mother
of immortal gods
and of mortal men,
weary from searching,weary from wandering far and wide,
you once ended your fast
in the valley of Eleusis,
you came to Hades
for noble Persephone.
Your guide wasthe innocent child of Dysaules,
who brought the news
of pure Chthonic Zeus' holy union;
you bore divine Euboulos
by yielding to human need.
O goddess, O queen to whom many pray,I beseech you
to come graciously
to your pious initiate.

42. To Mise
incense—storax
I call upon law-giving Dionysos,
who carried the fennel stalk,
unforgettable and many-named
seed of Eubouleus,
I call upon the sacred and holy,upon the ineffable queen Mise,
whose twofold nature is male and female.
Redeeming Iacchos, lord, I summon you,
whether you delight in Eleusis
in your fragrant temple,
or with Mother you partakeof mystic rites in Phrygia,
or you rejoice in Kypros
with fair-wreathed Kythereia,
or yet you exult in fields
wheat-bearing and hallowed
along Egypt's riverwith your divine mother,
the revered and black-robed Isis,
as your train of nurses tends to your needs.
Lady, kindheartedly come
to the noble contests of our initiation.

43. To the Seasons
incense—aromatic herbs
Seasons, daughters of Themis,
daughters of Lord Zeus,
Eunomia and Dike
and thrice-blessed Eirene,
pure spirits of spring,of blossoming meadows,
you are found in every color, in all scents
wafted by the breezes.
Ever-blooming, revolving, and sweet-faced,
O Seasons,
you cloak yourselves with the dewof luxuriant flowers.
At play you are companions
of holy Persephone, when the Fates
and the Graces in circling dances
come forth to the light,
pleasing Zeusand their mother, giver of fruits.
Come to the new initiates
and their holy and reverent rites,
bring perfect seasons
for the growth of goodly fruit.

44. To Semele
incense—storax
I call upon the daughter of Kadmos,
queen of all,
fair Semele of the lovely tresses,
of the full bosom,
mother of thyrsos-bearing,joyous Dionysos.
She was driven to great pain
by the blazing thunderbolt,
which, through the counsels of Kronian Zeus,
the immortal god, burned her.
Noble Persephonegranted her honors
among mortal men,
honors given every third year.
For all mortal men reenact your travail
for your son Bacchos:
the sacred ritual of the table,the ritual of the holy mysteries.

45. Hymn to Dionysos Bassareus and Triennial
Come blessed Dionysos,
bull-faced god conceived in fire,
Bassareus and Bacchos,
many-named master of all.
You delight in bloody swords,you delight in the holy Maenads,
as you howl throughout Olympos,
all-roaring and frenzied Bacchos.
Armed with the thyrsos, wrathful in the extreme,
you are honored
by all gods and all menwho dwell upon the earth.
Come, blessed and leaping god,
bring abundant joy to all.

46. To Liknites
incense—powdered frankincense
I summon to these prayers
Dionysos Liknites,
born at Nysa, blossoming,
beloved and kindly Bacchos,
nursling of the Nymphsand of fair-wreathed Aphrodite.
The forests once felt your feet
quiver in the dance
as frenzy drove you and the graceful Nymphs
on and on.
The counsels of Zeus brought youto noble Persephone,
who reared you to be loved
by the deathless gods.
Kindheartedly come, O blessed one,
accept the gift of this sacrifice.

47. To Perikionios
incense—aromatic herbs
I call upon Bacchos Perikionios,
giver of wine;
he enveloped
all of Kadmos' house,
with his might he harnessed,  he calmed the heaving earth,
when the blazing thunderbolt,
when the raging gale
stirred all the land,
as everyone's bonds sprang loose.
Blessed reveler,come with joyful heart.

48. To Sabazios
incense—aromatic herbs
Hear me, father Sabazios,
son of Kronos, illustrious god,
you sewed into your thigh
Bacchic Dionysos,
the roaring Eiraphiotes,that he might come whole
to noble Tmolos
by the side of fair-cheeked Hipta.
O blessed ruler of Phrygia,
supreme king of all,
come kindheartedly to the aid  of the initiates.

49. To Hipta
incense—storax
I call upon Hipta, nurse of Bacchos,
maiden possessed,
in mystic rites she takes part,
she exults in the worship of pure Sabos
and in the dancesof roaring Iacchos.
O queen and chthonic mother,
hear my prayer,
whether you are on Ida,
Phrygia's sacred mountain,
or you take your pleasure on Tmolos, fair seat of the Lydians,
come to these rites
with joy on your holy face.

50. To Lysios Lenaios
Hear, O blessed son of Zeus and of two mothers,
Bacchos of the vintage,
unforgettable seed,
many-named and redeeming daimōn,
holy offspring of the gods,reveling Bacchos, born of secrecy,
plump giver of many joys,
of fruits which grow well.
Mighty and many-shaped god,
you burst forth from the earth to reach the wine press,
to become a healer for men's pain,O sacred blossom!
A sorrow-hating joy to mortals,
O lovely-haired ...,
a redeemer and a reveler you are,
your thyrsos drives to frenzy,
you are kind-hearted to allgods and mortals who see your light.
I call upon you now,
come, O sweet bringer of fruit.

51. To the Nymphs
incense—aromatic herbs
O Nymphs, daughters
of great-hearted Okeanos,
you dwell inside
the earth's damp caves;
you are as secret as your paths, O joyous,  O chthonic nurses of Bacchos.
You nurture fruits, you haunt meadows,
O sprightly and pure
travelers of the winding roads,
who delight in caves and grottos.
Swift, light-footed, and clothed in dew,   you frequent springs,
visible and invisible,
in ravines and among flowers
you shout and frisk with Pan
upon mountainsides,
gliding down on rocks,you hum with clear voice.
O mountain-haunting maidens of the fields,
of gushing springs and of woodlands,
sweet-smelling virgins,
clothed in white, fresh as the breeze,
herds of goats, pastures, splendid fruit,  you protect; wild animals love you.
Though you are tender, cold delights you;
you feed many, you help them grow,

Hamadryad maidens,
playful, water-loving.
Spring is your joy, O Nysian and frenzied, O healing ones,
in the company of Bacchos and Deo,
you bring grace to mortals.
Come to this blessed sacrifice
with joyful heart,
pour streams of pure rainduring the grain-giving seasons.

52. To the God of Triennial Feasts
incense—aromatic herbs
I call upon you, blessed, many-named,
frenzied Bacchos,
bull-horned, Nysian, Lysios,
Lenaios, conceived in fire.
Nourished in the thigh, Liknites,you lead torch-lit processions,
you lead them in the night, O filleted,
O thyrsos-shaking Eubouleus.
Your nature three-fold, your rites ineffable,
O secret offspring of Zeus,
primeval, Erikepaios,father and son of the gods,
you take raw flesh, and sceptered you lead us
into the madness of revel and dance,
into the frenzy of triennial feasts
that bestow calm on us.
You burst forth from the earth in a blaze ...,O son of two mothers,
horned and clad in fawn skin, you roam the mountains,
O lord worshipped in annual feasts.
Paian of the golden spear,
nursling, decked with grapes,
Bassaros, exulting in ivy,followed by many maidens ...,
joyous and all-abounding, come,
O blessed one, to the initiates.

53. To the God of Annual Feasts
incense—all other things, save frankincense—a libation of milk, too
I call upon Bacchos, the god we worship annually,
chthonic Dionysos,
together with the fair-tressed Nymphs
he is roused.
In the sacred halls of Persephonehe slumbers and puts to sleep
pure
Bacchic time, every third year.
When he himself stirs up
the triennial revel again,
he sings a hymntogether with his fair-girdled nurses.
As the seasons revolve,
he puts to sleep and wakes up the years.
O blessed and fruit-giving Bacchos,
O horned spirit of the unripe fruit,
come to this most sacred ritewith a glow of joy on your face,
come teeming with fruit
that is holy and perfect.

54. To Silenos Satyros and the Bacchae
incense—powdered frankincense
Hear me, foster father
of Bacchos, father and nurturer,
best of the Silenoi,
honored by all the gods,
honored by mortal menin the same triennial feasts.
Pure and prized marshal
of the pastoral band,
wakeful reveler and companion
of the fair-girt nurses,
leader of the ivy-crowned   Naiads and of the Bacchantes,
take all the Satyrs,
half-men, half-beast,
come howling
to the Bacchic lord.
The Bacchantes escortthe holy Lenaian procession
in sacred litanies
revealing torch-lit rites,
shouting, thyrsos-loving,
finding calm in the revels.

55. To Aphrodite
Heavenly, smiling Aphrodite,
praised in many hymns,
sea-born revered goddess of generation,
you like the night-long revel,
you couple lovers at night,O scheming mother of Necessity.
Everything comes from you:
you have yoked the world,
you control all three realms,
you give birth to all,
to everything in heaven,to everything upon the fruitful earth,
to everything in the depths of the sea,
O venerable companion of Bacchos.
You delight in festivities,
O bride-like mother of the Erotes,
O Persuasion, whose joy is in the bed of love,   secretive giver of grace,
visible and invisible,
lovely-tressed daughter of a noble father,
bridal feast companion of the gods,
sceptered, she-wolf,
beloved and man-loving,giver of birth and life.
Your maddening love-charms
yoke mortals,
they yoke the many races of beasts
to unbridled passion.

Come, O goddess born in Kypros:you may be on Olympos,
O queen, exulting
in the beauty of your face,
you may be in Syria,
country of fine frankincense,
you may be drivingyour golden chariot in the plain,
you may lord it over
Egypt's fertile river bed.
Come, whether you ride your swan-drawn chariot
over the sea's billows,
joining the creatures of the deepas they dance in circles,
or on land in the company
of the dark-faced nymphs
as light-footed they frisk
over the sandy beaches.
Come lady, even if you arein Kypros that cherishes you,
where fair maidens and chaste brides
throughout the year sing of you,
O blessed one,
as they sing of immortal, pure Adonis.
Come, O beautiful,O comely goddess,
I summon you with holy words,
I summon you with a pious soul.

56. To Adonis
incense—aromatic herbs
Hear my prayer, O best,
O many-named god.
Fine-haired, solitary,
ever bursting with lovely song,
Eubouleus, many-shaped,noble nurturer of all,
male and female in one ...
unwithering bloom, O Adonis,
you vanish and then shine again
in the fair season's turn.
Two-horned spirit of growth,   much loved and wept for,
fair one, joyful hunter,
god of the luxuriant mane,
desire is in you, O sweet blossom,
O son of Aphrodite and Eros,
born on the bedof lovely-tressed Persephone.
You dwell deep
in murky Tartaros,
then again toward Olympos
you carry your blossoming body.
Come, O blessed one, bring   earth's fruits to the initiates.

57. To Chthonic Hermes
incense—storax
You dwell on the road all must take,
the road of no return, by the Kokytos,
you guide the souls
of mortals to the nether gloom.
Hermes, offspring of Dionysoswho revels in the dance,
and of Aphrodite, the Paphian maiden
of the fluttering eyelids,
you haunt the sacred house of Persephone
as guide throughout the earth of ill-fated souls,
the souls you bring to their destined harborwhen their time has come;
you charm them with your sacred wand,
you give them sleep
from which you rouse them again.
It is to you indeed
that Persephone gave the high officethroughout broad Tartaros
to lead the way
for the everlasting souls of men.
O blessed one, grant a good end
for the labors of the initiates.

58. To Eros
incense—aromatic herbs
I call upon you, great, pure,
lovely and sweet Eros,
winged archer who runs
swiftly on a path of fire,
who plays together with godsand mortal men.
Inventive, two-natured,
you are master of all:
of the sky's ether, of the sea and the land,
of the all-begetting winds,
which for mortals the goddessof grass and grain nurtures,
of all that lies in Tartaros,
of all that lies in the roaring sea;
you alone govern
the course of all these.
O blessed one, come to the initiates   with pure thought,
banish from them
vile impulses.

59. To the Fates
incense—aromatic herbs
Boundless Fates,
dear children of dark Night,
hear my prayer,
O many-named
dwellers on the lake of heaven,where the frozen water is broken
by night's warmth
in the shady hollow of a sleek cave;
from there you fly to the vast earth,
home of mortals, from there,
clothed in purple, you marchtoward men,
whose noble aims
match their vain hopes,
in the realm of the dead,
where glory drives her chariot on
all over the earthbeyond the ends of Justice,
of anxious hope, of primeval law,
of the measureless principle of order.
In life Fate alone watches;
the other immortals
who dwell on the peaksof snowy Olympos do not,
except for Zeus' perfect eye.
Fate and Zeus' mind

know all things
for all time.
I pray to you to come,gently and kindly,
Atropos, Lakhesis, Klotho,
offspring of noble stock.
Airy, invisible, inexorable,
ever indestructible,
you give all and take all,being to men the same as necessity.
Fates, hear my prayers,
receive my libations,
come gently to the initiates,
free them from pain.

60. To the Graces
incense—storax
Hear me, O illustrious,
O renowned Graces,
daughters of Zeus
and full-bosomed Eunomia,
Aglaia, Thalia,blessed Euphrosyne,
lovely, wise, and pure
mothers of joy,
many-shaped, ever-blooming,
beloved of mortals.
We pray that each in her turnwith a flower's beauty on her face, enchanting,
come, ever gentle, to the initiates
to bring them prosperity.

61. Hymn to Nemesis
Nemesis, I call upon you,
O goddess, O great queen,
your all-seeing eye looks upon
the lives of man's many races.
Eternal and revered,you alone rejoice in the just,
you change and vary,
you shift your word.
All who bear the yoke
of mortality fear you,
you care about the thoughts of all; the arrogant soul,
the reckless one,
finds no escape.
You see all, you hear all,
you arbitrate all.
O sublime deity,in whom dwells justice for men,
come, blessed and pure one,
ever helpful to the initiates,
grant nobility of mind,
put an end to repulsive thoughts,
thoughts unholy,fickle and haughty.

62. To Dike
incense—frankincense
I sing of the all-seeing eye
of comely and radiant Dike,
who is seated upon the sacred throne
of lord Zeus.
From heaven you watch the lives  of the many human races,
you crush the unjust
with just retribution,
matching things lawless
through the truth of equality.
For whenever base opinionsprevail in difficult verdicts,
because men wish more
than is fair,
you intervene and rouse
justice against her foes.
An enemy of the unjust,you are a gentle goddess to the just.
O goddess, come evenhanded
to thoughts that are noble,
until that fated day
descends on my life.

63. To Justice
incense—frankincense
O paragon of justice to mortals,
blessed and beloved one,
you take equal pleasure
in all men who are just.
Honored by all and blissful,O bold, O lofty Justice,
you are pure of thought,
you reward propriety,
your own conscience is unbreakable
for you break all
who do not submit to your yoke,but ...
in their greed upset
the balance of your mighty scales.
Dauntless, charming,
a lover of revel loved by all,
you rejoice in peace, you strivefor a life that is stable.
You loath unfairness,
but fairness delights you;
in you knowledge of virtue
reaches its noble goal.
Hear, O goddess,rightly shatter wicked men,
so that mortals who eat
of the fruits of this earth

and also all living creatures
nursed in the bosom
of Earth, the divine mother,nursed in the bosom of sea-dwelling Zeus,
may follow a path
both balanced and noble.

64. Hymn to Nomos
Upon the holy lord
of men and gods I call,
heavenly Nomos, who arranges
the stars and sets a fair limit
between the earth and the waters of the sea;  it is his laws
that ever preserve nature's balance,
obedient and steady.
Journeying on the heavens,
he brings the laws from above,
with a roar he drives outmalicious envy.
Nomos summons
a good end to mortal life,
he alone steers the course
of everything that breathes,
ever the steadfast companionof righteous thought.
Primeval and wise, in peace he shares
the same house with all who abide by the law,
bringing harsh vengeance
upon the lawless.
O blessed bringer of prosperity,beloved of all and honored,
with kindness of heart send forth
memory of you, O mighty one.

65. To Ares
incense—frankincense
Unbreakable, strong-spirited,
mighty, powerful daimōn,
delighting in arms, indomitable,
man-slaying, wall-battering,
lord Ares, yours is the din of arms. Ever bespattered with blood,
you find joy in killing
in the fray of battle, O horrid one,
your desire is for the rude clash
of swords and spears.
Stay the rage, stay the strife,    relax pain's grip on my soul,
yield to the wish of Kypris,
yield to the revels of Lyaios,
exchange the might of arms
for the works of Deo,
yearning for youth-nurturing peace,bliss-bringing peace.

66. To Hephaistos
incense—powdered frankincense
Hephaistos, powerful and strong-spirited,
unwearying fire,
shining in the gleam of flames,
a god bringing light to mortals,
mighty-handed,eternal artisan,
worker, part of the cosmos,
blameless element,
most sublime, all-eating,
all-taming, all-haunting—
ether, sun, stars,moon, pure light:
all these parts of Hephaistos
are revealed to mortals.
All homes, all cities,
all nations are yours.
O mighty giver of many blessings,you dwell in human bodies.
Hear me, lord, as I summon you
to this holy libation,
that you may always come
gentle to joyful deeds,
end the savage rageof untiring fire
as nature itself
burns in our own bodies.

67. To Asklepios
incense—frankincense
Asklepios, lord Paian,
healer of all,
you charm away the pains
of men who suffer.
Come, mighty and soothing,  bring health,
put an end to sickness,
then to the harsh fate of death.
O blessed spirit of joyful growth,
O helper, you ward off evil,
honored and mighty sonof Phoibos Apollon.
Enemy of disease,
consort of Hygieia the blameless,
come as savior, O blessed one,
bring life to a good end.

68. To Hygeia
incense—frankincense
Charming queen of all,
lovely and blooming,
blessed Hygeia, mother of all,
bringer of bliss, hear me.
Through you vanishthe illnesses that afflict man,
through you every house
blossoms to the fullness of joy.
The arts thrive when the world
desires you, O queen,
loathed by Hades,the destroyer of souls.
Apart from you all is
without profit for men:
wealth, the sweet giver of abundance
for those who feast, fails,
and man never reachesthe many pains of old age.
Goddess, come, ever-helpful
to the initiates,
keep away the evil distress
of unbearable diseases.

69. To the Erinyes
incense—storax—powdered frankincense
Hear, Tisiphone, Allekto,
noble Megaira,
revered goddesses
whose Bacchic cries resound.
Nocturnal and clandestine,you live deep down
in the dank cave
by the sacred water of the Styx.
Men's unholy designs
do incur your anger;
rabid and arrogant, you howlover Necessity's dictates,
clothed in animal skins,
you cause the deep pains of retribution.
O dreaded maidens of the thousand faces,
your realm is in Hades,
phantoms airy, invisible,swift as thought you are.
The speedy flames of the sun
and the moon's glow
cannot arouse life's delights
without your aid,
neither can the excellence of wisdom,  as well as the virtue and the joy
in bold enterprise
and in the sleekness of fair youth.

Upon the races of all men
that remain countless,
you gaze as the eye of Dike,ever in charge of justice.
O snake-haired and many-shaped
goddesses of fate,
change my thoughts of life
into gentle and soft ones.

70. To the Eumenides
incense—aromatic herbs
Hear me and be gracious,
O renowned Eumenides,
O pure daughters
of the great Chthonic Zeus
and of lovely Persephone,fair-tressed maiden.
Over the lives of impious mortals
you keep a careful eye,
in charge of Necessity,
you punish the unjust.
Black-skinned queens,your awesome eyes flash forth
flesh-eating
darts of light.
Everlasting, repugnant,
frightful, sovereign,
paralyzing the limbs with madness,hideous, nocturnal, fateful,
snake-haired, terrible
maidens of the night,
it is you I summon
to bring me holiness of mind.

71. To Melinoe
incense—aromatic herbs
I call upon Melinoe,
saffron-cloaked nymph of the earth,
whom revered Persephone bore
by the mouth of the Kokytos river
upon the sacred bedof Kronian Zeus.
In the guise of Plouton Zeus tricked
Persephone and through wily plots bedded her;
a two-bodied specter sprang forth
from Persephone's fury.
This specter drives mortals to madnesswith her airy apparitions
as she appears in weird shapes
and strange forms,
now plain to the eye, now shadowy,
now shining in the darkness—
all this in unnerving attacksin the gloom of night.
O goddess, O queen
of those below, I beseech you
to banish the soul's frenzy
to the ends of the earth,
show to the initiatesa kindly and holy face.

72. To Tyche
incense—frankincense
I summon you here through prayer,
Tyche, noble ruler,
gentle goddess of the roads,
for wealth and possessions,
I summon you as Artemis the guide,renowned and sprung from the loins
of Eubouleus,
your wish is irresistible.
Funereal and delusive,
you are the theme of men's songs.
In you lies the great varietyof men's livelihood:
to some you grant a wealth
of blessings and possessions,
to others you bring evil poverty
if you harbor anger against them.
O goddess, I beseech you,come in kindness to my life,
grant me happiness,
grant me abundant wealth.

73. To Daimon
incense—frankincense
I call upon Daimon,
the grand and the dreaded leader,
gentle Zeus, who gives birth to all,
who gives livelihood to mortals.
Great Zeus, wide roving,avenger, king of all,
giver of wealth when you enter the house
in the abundance of your powers,
you refresh the life of mortals
worn out with toil,
you possess the keys to joyand sorrow as well.
So, O pure and blessed one,
drive painful cares away,
cares that dispatch ruin to all that live
throughout the whole earth,
and bring a glorious end to my life,   a sweet and noble one.

74. To Leukothea
incense—aromatic herbs
I call upon Leukothea,
daughter of Kadmos, revered goddess,
mighty nurturer
of fair-wreathed Dionysos.
Hearken, O goddess,O mistress of the deep-bosomed sea,
you delight in waves,
you are the greatest savior to mortals,
on you depends the unsteady heave
of seafaring ships,
you alone save menfrom wretched death at sea,
men to whom you swiftly come
as welcome savior.
O divine lady,
come to the aid
of well-benched ships,do kindly save them,
bring upon the sea
a fair tail wind to the initiates.

75. To Palaimon
incense—powdered frankincense
Comrade of joyous Dionysos
in the revel of the dance,
you dwell in the sea's
pure, restless depths.
I call upon you, O Palaimon, to come to these sacred rites
with kindness in your heart,
with joy on your youthful face,
come to save your initiates
on land and on sea.
When storms come upon ships that ever rove the seas,
you alone appear incarnate
to save men,
to stay the harsh anger
over the briny swell.

76. To the Muses
incense—frankincense
Daughters of Mnemosyne,
daughters of thundering Zeus,
Pierian Muses,
renowned and illustrious,
many-shaped and belovedof the mortals you visit,
you give birth to unblemished virtue
in every discipline,
you nourish the soul,
you set thought aright
as you become leaders,as you become mistresses of the mind's power.
Sacred and mystic rites
you taught to mortals,
Kleio, Euterpe,
Thaleia, Melpomene,
Terpsichore, Erato,Polymnia, Ourania,
mother Kalliope,
mighty goddess Hagne.
Do come to the initiates, O goddesses,
in your manifold holiness,
do bring glory and emulationthat is lovely and sung by many.

77. To Mnemosyne
incense—frankincense
I call upon queen Mnemosyne,
Zeus' consort,
who gave birth to the holy,
the sacred, the clear-voiced Muses.
Evil oblivion that harms the mind is alien to her
who gives coherence
to the mind and soul of mortals.
She increases men's power,
their ability to think,
sweet and vigilant,she reminds us of all
the thoughts we store
forever in our breasts,
never straying and ever rousing
the mind to action.
O blessed goddess,for the initiates stir the memory
of the sacred rite,
ward off oblivion from them.

78. To Dawn
incense—powdered frankincense
Hear, O goddess, you bring
the light of day to mortals,
resplendent Dawn, you blush
throughout the world,
messenger of the great,the illustrious Titan.
Murky, dark,
journeying night
you send below the earth
when you arrive;
mortal men you lead to work   as you tend to their lives.
The race of mortal men
delights in you,
no one escapes your sight
as you look down from on high,
when from your eyelidsyou shake off sweet sleep,
when there is joy
for every mortal,
for every reptile,
for animals,
for birds,for the broods the sea contains.
All blessings that come from work
are your gift.

Goddess, blessed and pure, give
more sacred light to the initiates.

79. To Themis
incense—frankincense
I call upon pure Themis,
daughter of noble Sky
and Earth, Themis the young,
the lovely-faced maiden,
the first to show mortalsthe holy oracle
as prophetess of the gods
in her Delphic hideaway
on Pythian ground
where Python was king.
You taught lord Phoibosthe art of giving laws.
Amid reverence and honor
you shine in the night,
for you were first
to teach men holy worship,
howling to Bacchosin nights of revelry;
from you come the honors
of the gods, the honors of the holy mysteries.
O blessed maiden,
come in a joyous, in a kindly spirit
to your very sacred,to your mystical rites.

80. To Boreas
incense—frankincense
Freezing Boreas, your wintry breezes
make the world's
lofty air quiver,
come from snowy Thrace!
Dissolve the rebellious alliance   of clouds and moist air,
turn the water
to rushing drops of rain,
bring fair weather everywhere,
brighten Ether's face
as the sun's raysshine upon the earth.

81. To Zephyros
incense—frankincense
Western breezes born of the open sea,
ethereal wonders,
as you blow gently
your whisper brings rest from toil.
Vernal, meadow-haunting,you are loved by harbors
because to ships you bring
a gentle passage, soft light wind.
Come in a generous spirit,
blow in unblemished ways,
O airy, O invisible,O light-winged ones.

82. To Notos
incense—frankincense
Quickly leaping
through the moist air
as both of your swift wings vibrate,
O father of rain, come,
riding the southern clouds.Zeus did grant you
this lofty prerogative:
to send the rain-giving clouds
from sky to earth.
For this we pray to you, O blessed one,
take delight in our sacrifice,do send fruit-nourishing rains to mother Earth.

83. To Okeanos
incense—aromatic herbs
I summon Okeanos,
ageless, eternal father,
begetter of immortal gods,
begetter of mortal men.
Your waves, O Okeanos,gird the boundaries of the earth.
From you come all the seas,
from you come all the rivers,
from you come the pure, the flowing waters
of earth's springs.
Hear me, O blessed god,O highest, O divine purifier,
where you end the earth ends,
the pole begins where ships glide on,
come, grant favor,
grant grace to the initiates.

84. To Hestia
incense—aromatic herbs
Queen Hestia,
daughter of mighty Kronos,
mistress of ever-burning fire,
you dwell in the center of the house.
May you raise the holy initiatesin these sacred rites,
may you grant them unwithering youth,
wealth as well, prudence and purity.
Home of the blessed gods,
men's mighty buttress,
eternal, many-shaped,beloved, grass-yellow,
smile, O blessed one,
kindly accept these offerings,
waft upon us prosperity,
breathe upon us gentle-handed health.

85. To Sleep
incense with opium poppy
Sleep, you are lord of all,
lord of blessed gods and of mortal men,
of every living thing
the broad earth nurtures,
for you alone are master of all,you do visit all,
binding their bodies
with fetters unforged.
You free us of cares, you offer
sweet respite from toil,
you grant holy solaceto our every sorrow,
you save souls by easing them
into the thought of Death,
since to Death and Oblivion
you are a true brother.
But, O blessed one, I beseech you   to come sweet-tempered,
to be a kindly savior of the initiates,
that they may serve the gods.

86. To Dream
incense—aromatic herbs
I call upon you, blessed,
long-winged, baneful Dream,
messenger of things to come,
greatest prophet to mortals.
In the quiet of sweet sleepyou come silent,
you speak to the soul,
you rouse men's minds,
in their sleep you whisper
the will of the gods;
silent you come to showthe future to silent souls
that walk the noble path
of devotion to the gods.
Good always wins the race
in people's minds,
good leads their livesto pleasures anticipated,
to a respite from suffering,
that god himself may reveal
the firmament of the divine lords
... through vows and sacrifices.
The end to which the pious comeis always so sweeter,
but to the impious never
does a dreamy phantom,

a prophet of evil deeds,
reveal future need
so that they may find the cure  from pain to come.
But, O blessed one, I beg you,
show me the behests of the gods,
in all things bring me close
to the path that is straight,
do not through weird apparitionsshow me evil signs.

87. To Death
incense—powdered frankincense
Hear me, you who steer
the path of all mortals
and give sacred time to all
from whom you are distant.
Your sleep tears the soulfree from the body's hold,
whenever you undo
nature's powerful bonds,
bringing the long slumber,
the endless one, to the living.
Common to all,you are unjust to some,
when you bring swift end to youthful life
at its peak.
In you alone is executed
the verdict common to all,
for to entreaties and to prayersyou alone are deaf.
O blessed one,
with pious vows, with sacrifices,
I beg you, I pray to you,
grant me long life,
that old age might bea noble prize among men.

NOTES
Abbreviations
OHx.y(-
z)
Orphic Hymns, hymn number x, line(s) y(-z). An n appended refers to the
relevant note; an i appended refers to the introduction to the relevant
hymn. References combined are indicated by a + sign. The opening
address of Orpheus to Mousaios is indicated by the letter O.
PGMPapyri graecae magicae (Betz 1986)
PMGPoetae melici graeci (Page 1962)
PMGFPoetarum melicorum graecorum fragmenta (Davies 1991)
SVF x.y
Stoicorum veterorum fragmenta (von Arnim 1903–1921), volume x,
fragment y
Introduction
1. Cf. Hesiod Works and Days 259 and Sophokles Oedipus at Kolonos 1382.
2. See OH 34.16–23n.
3. For details, see Betegh 2004 and Kouremenos/Parássoglou/Tsantsanoglou 2006.
4. For details, see Graf/Johnston 2007.
5. For a summary of these (and other) Orphic theogonies, see Betegh 2004, pp.
140–152, and, for a reconstructed diachronic evolution, see West 1983.
6. See OH Oi.
7. See Graf /Johnston 2007, pp. 70–80 and passim.
8. For a detailed treatment of the genre, see Furley/Bremer 2001.
9. Cf. Euripides Hippolytos 954, Aristophanes Frogs 1032, Plato Republic 364e,
Plato Cratylus 402b, Plato Philebus 66c, and Aristotle De anima 410b.
10. See OH 37i.
11. See OH 30i.
12. See also OH 87.3–4n.

13. See OH 14.8–9n.
14. For a convenient list, see Siddiqi 1990.
15. Macdonell 1917, no. 8.
16. Macdonell 1917, no. 9.
17. Sergeant 2009, p. 37.
18. For a very thorough treatment of the names of the bear in the Finnic lands, see
Pentikäinen 2007, esp. pp. 94–117.
Orpheus to Mousaios
The  opening  poem  of  the  collection  portrays  the  fiction  of  Orpheus  instructing
Mousaios in a rite. A loose parallel may be adduced in the case of Hesiod, who tells us
of his transformation from shepherd to poet in the beginning of the Theogony (1–114);
note in particular how the Muses there are initially described singing a hymn to a list of
divinities (11–21), similar to what we find in this poem. Inclusivity is a characteristic of
Greek polytheism, and it can be dangerous to omit the wrong divinity. This is a
recurring theme in myth (e.g., the Kalydonian Boar because Artemis was neglected, the
infidelity of Helen and her sister Klytemnestra because Aphrodite was neglected, the
apple in the Judgment of Paris because Strife was snubbed).
For Orpheus, see the introduction to the translation. Mousaios was also a semi-
legendary figure of questionable antiquity who was thought to be both a poet (his name
means “of the Muse”) and a founder of religious rites. He was considered to be the
father  of  Eumolpos,  the  eponymous  ancestor  of  the  Eumolpids,  one  of  the  two
hereditary families entrusted to administrating the Eleusinian Mysteries (see OH 40i).
Mousaios seems to have been originally independent of Orpheus but later was made his
son and/or disciple. The address “friend” here suggests at least the latter. For more on
Mousaios, see West 1983, pp. 39–44.
There is a question whether this poem belongs with our collection or was added at
some later date after the Hymns had been made part of a greater compilation of ancient
hymns. It will become immediately apparent that the order of divinities in this poem
does  not,  for  the  most  part,  match  the  order  of  the  hymns  to  individual  deities.
Furthermore, some personalities, such as Hebe, are mentioned only in this poem, while
others who have a hymn devoted to them in the collection, such as Hestia, do not appear
here. West argues that this opening address to Mousaios was not part of the original
collection but instead might  have been the Thuēpolikon (Sacrifice  or Mystic  Rites)
mentioned among the works of Orpheus in the Souda, a tenth-century AD Byzantine
lexicon/encyclopedia  (West  1968,  pp.  288–289).  However,  the  arguments  against

originality are certainly not insurmountable. For example, given how interconnected
various hymns are (through language and motif), the opening may have been felt
comprehensive enough despite the discrepancy between the divinities invoked in it and
those that receive hymns in the rest of the collection. Another possibility is that the
poem was an independent entity that our composer somewhat inartfully grafted onto his
efforts. The opening and closing lines could easily have been altered from, and/or added
to, the original. Indeed, the original might even have been the inspiration for creating a
series of hymns dedicated to individual entities, and the collection could then be viewed
as an (imperfect) expansion of it, adapted to the exigencies of the particular ritual in
which it was performed.
It should also be pointed out that the fiction presented here of the master Orpheus
passing on wisdom to his disciple Mousaios would have had great significance for the
initiates. Beyond the fancy that attributing the rite to the august figure Orpheus lends the
whole affair an aura of prestige and legitimacy, in the performance of this poem it is not
only Mousaios who is the beneficiary of Orpheus' special knowledge but also the
initiates themselves. The poem could represent the foundational act of the ritual and
have been felt to provide the raison d'être for the cult's existence. There might be an
element of play-acting here, of taking on another role, something that is prevalent in
Dionysian worship (see OH 30i). One wonders if it was not the group but a figure of
authority (the “oxherd”?) who opened the ceremony by chanting these verses in the
guise of Orpheus. We find the theme of foundation of rites appearing intermittently
throughout the collection; see OH  76.7n.  It  is  perhaps  significant  that  many  such
instances involve groups, which might also be serving to break down the divide of
mythic past and present reality.
For the divinities mentioned in this poem who have their own hymn(s), the reader is
referred to the appropriate introduction and notes for more information.
–5: The use of elements as an ordering technique found elsewhere in the collection
(see OH 15i and OH 79i) seems to be used here as well, with Zeus representing air,
Earth herself, the celestial bodies fire, and Poseidon water. The same grouping,
albeit in a different order, appears in lines 32–33. See also note to line 38. For Zeus
as the first god mentioned, see note to line 41.
11: Aphrodite, the coy goddess, is coyly alluded here. Her position after Hephaistos
might be due to the fact that she is sometimes his wife in mythology (see OH 66i).
12:  Hades  is  meant.  He  is  often  addressed  by  such  circumlocutions  since  it  was
considered ill-omened to mention him by name (see also OH 18.3n and OH 69i).
13 Hebe: Her name means “youth.” She is the daughter of Zeus and Hera. In traditional

myth she was the cup-bearer of the gods, until Zeus abducted Ganymede and
installed him in her place. Later she became the wife of the deified Herakles; see OH
12i.
14  Justice  and  Piety: OH  63  is  addressed  to  the  personified  Justice.  For  her
relationship to Piety, see the introduction to that hymn.
18 Year: Proclus cites some lines from a poem he attributes to Orpheus where in the
version of Aphrodite's birth from the castration of Kronos, it is Year that gives birth
to her after she had been surrounded by foam; Proclus elsewhere states that “the
theurgists” worshipped Year, as well as Time, Day, Night, and Month (Orphic
fragment 189). Aelian reports that in Gadeira (modern day Cádiz), the inhabitants
had an altar for Year and Month (Orphic fragment 19). See also OH 12.3n.
19 Dione: In Homer, she is the mother of Aphrodite and consoles her after she is
wounded  by  Diomedes  (Iliad  5.370–417).  She  assists  in  the  birth  of  Apollon
(Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.93), which may explain her place after Leto here. For
Hesiod, she is an Okeanid (Theogony 353) and one of the divinities praised by the
Muses  in  song  as  they  head  out  to  Olympos  from  Helikon  (Theogony  17).
Apollodoros, in contrast to Hesiod, makes her a Titan (1.1.2) and the mother of
Aphrodite (1.3.1; see also OH 55i). The Rhapsodies also made Dione a Titan (Orphic
fragment 179; see also OH 4i).
20–22: A number of similar divinities are clustered together here. While the Kouretes
and Korybantes are separate entities, they often are confounded with one another, as
at OH 38.20–21, where they are also identified as the gods of the Samothracian
mystery cult and Zeus' sons Kastor and Polydeukes, the Dioskouroi (see OH 27i and
OH 38.20–21n). Here the Kabeiroi, called saviors and the sons of Zeus, apparently
are being identified with the Dioskouroi. However, they usually are separate as well,
the  gods  of  a  mystery  cult  at  Lemnos  and  Thebes  that  was  connected  with
blacksmiths (see Burkert 1985, pp. 281–282, OH 39i and OH 66i). Interestingly
enough, the Kabeiroi seem to have been worshipped on Samothrace, too (Herodotos
2.51.2; but see Burkert 1985, p. 283), which might have influenced the composer of
this hymn. The Dioskouroi, Kouretes, and Kabeiroi are all possible identities of the
mysterious  “Boy  Lords”  worshipped  in  a  mystery  cult  at  Amphissa  (Pausanias
10.38.7). The Idaian gods are a reference to the Idaian Dactyls, for whom see OH
12i. They, too, had a connection with Samothrace (see Graf/Johnston 2007, p. 170),
which further suggests that the Kabeiroi here are being associated with that island.
24 Day: Hesiod makes Day the child of Night and Erebos (Theogony 124). See also
note to line 18 and OH 3i.

25 Faith: We find Faith personified first in Theognis, who says that only Hope remains
among men, but Faith, Prudence, and the Graces have fled to Olympos (1135–
1138). This is a pastiche of Hesiod's tale of Pandora and the jar and the departure of
Shame and Nemesis from the earth (Works and Days 90–99 and 197–201). Faith
occasionally is worshipped in cult, most notably for our collection at Pergamon,
where she shared an altar with Concord (see Nilsson 1961, p. 357).
25 Thesmodoteira: The name means “she that gives laws.” Demeter was known as
Thesmophoria (“she that bears laws”), and it is possible that this Thesmodoteira is
either  another  identity  of  Demeter  or  a  goddess  who  has  been  detached  from
Demeter and given a life of her own.
28–29: According to Hesiod, Atlas is a Titan who supports the sky on his shoulders,
both out of “harsh necessity” and because this burden had been imposed upon him
by Zeus (Theogony 517–520). This idea was taken up in Orphic mythology and
justified by Atlas' participation in the murder of Dionysos (Orphic fragment 319).
Homer, however, has him in the sea supporting both the earth and the sky (Odyssey
1.52–54), perhaps reminiscent of the Hittite Ullikummis. Aion (Eon, Eternity) is
closely related to Time; Euripides makes Aion the son of Time, perhaps married to
Fate (Herakleidai 900). He was a late-comer to cult; for an exhaustive review of the
sources, see Nock 1934, pp. 83–98 (with discussion of this line on pp. 88–89), and
Nilsson  1961,  pp.  498–505.  Time  is  an  important  figure  in  some  Orphic
cosmogonies.  He  is  counted  among  the  first  entities  in  creation,  and  the  one
responsible for the birth of Protogonos (see OH 6i+6.1n).
29 Styx: One of the rivers of the underworld; see OH 69.4n.
30 Pronoia: See the introduction to the translation.
32–33:  The  serial  listing  of  the  sky,  earth,  and  sea—with  some  variations—is  a
recurring theme in the collection; see OH 10.14–16n.
35 Adrasteia: See OH 61i.
38 Thunder: Interestingly enough, we have a hymn for Zeus the Thunderbolt and one
for Zeus of the Lightning, but not one for the third of the group, Zeus of the
Thunder; conversely, only Thunder is mentioned here, not Lightning or Thunderbolt;
see further OH 20i.
38 four-pillared cosmos: The four pillars should probably be understood as the four
elements; see note to lines 3–5.
39: For Attis, see OH 27i. Men is a moon god of Asia Minor; see OH 9.4n.

40 Ourania: We find this as an epithet to Aphrodite, and, since Adonis is immediately
mentioned next (thus following the order of their hymns in our collection), it would
seem likely that Ourania here refers to Aphrodite (see OH 55i+1n), despite the fact
that this goddess has already been invoked at line 11 (albeit not by name). Ourania is
also traditionally one of the names of the Muses, and she is mentioned at OH 76.9.
41  Beginning  and  End:  These  appear  to  be  nothing  more  than  abstractions  of
philosophical terms. A papyrus fragment containing a commentary on a poem of
Alkman  that  is  no  longer  extant  reveals  a  cosmogony  that  started  from
undifferentiated matter that was given form through Poros (Way) and Tekmor (End,
Limit), which the commentator interprets as signifying the beginning and end of
things (PMGF 5 fr. 2 col. iii; translation and discussion in Kirk, Raven, and Schofield
1983, pp. 47–49). In all three extant versions of an Orphic hymn to Zeus, the god is
described as being the first and last (see OH 15.3–5n), and in OH 15.7 he is called
“the beginning and end of all” (and see note; however, the Greek word for “end”
there is different than the one found here). It is perhaps no surprise, then, that Zeus
begins the list of deities in this poem. He may even be understood as Beginning and
End here, which would neatly close the long list of divinities in this poem by ring
composition. Note, too, that the word “rite” (Greek “thuēpoliē”) appears in the first
and last line.
1. To Hekate
Hekate is a murky goddess on the fringes of Greek religion, and it is very possible that
she was originally a native goddess of the Karians, a people in Asia Minor. Her earliest
mention is in Hesiod's Theogony, a relatively long digression of such effusive praise that
it is often referred to as a “hymn to Hekate” (411–452). Hesiod asserts that Zeus did not
strip her of the honors she held before the defeat of the Titans, among whom she
numbers. The poet then goes on to list the wide-ranging powers of the goddess and
whom she can help or hinder as she pleases: kings, men speaking in assemblies, soldiers
in  battle,  athletes  at  competitions,  horsemen,  sailors  (along  with  Poseidon),  and
fishermen. Along with Hermes, she can bring fertility or sterility to flocks, and her role
in nurturing youths closes out this astounding list of domains. Hesiod also stresses the
fact that she is an only child. This picture of Hekate is unique in extant literature. Later
on she was frequently identified with Artemis and Moon; see OH 9i and OH 36i. Hesiod
perhaps is already moving in this direction, as he calls her a “nurturer of youths,” an
epithet usually applied to Artemis (cf. OH 36.8). Moreover, in Hesiod's genealogies,
Hekate is first cousin to Artemis and Apollon, since their mothers, Asteria and Leto
respectively, are sisters (Theogony 404–409). The connection with Moon is already

suggested in another early poem, the Homeric Hymn to Demeter. After Persephone had
been snatched by Hades, Hekate approaches Demeter and informs her that she heard the
screams of the abducted girl but did not see the perpetrator (2.51–61). This information
is supplied by Sun (2.62–90). Hekate is described as “carrying a light in her hands”
(2.52), and, as the female counterpart to Sun in their role as witnesses, seems to be
imagined as the moon goddess in these lines; see OH 2i and OH 9.3+n. Note, too, that
the name of her mother in Hesiod's genealogy, Asteria, means “starry.”
Thus in early Greek literature Hekate had definite celestial connections. But her
association in Hesiod with fertility hints at chthonic relations, as does her connection in
the story of the abduction of Persephone. When mother and daughter are reunited in the
Homeric Hymn to Demeter, Hekate joins in their celebration and becomes Persephone's
“attendant and follower” (2.438–440). She is therefore connected with the world of the
dead, and it is this attribute that comes to dominate her aspect in later times. In the
magical papyri, she is also explicitly equated with Persephone, along with other entities
such as the Fates (PGM 4.2714–2783 and 2785–2870). No longer is she a (potentially)
beneficial deity that might deign to grant a person blessings; instead she has become a
sinister and dangerous, sometimes demonic, creature of the night (compare lines –6 of
this hymn). Madness (cf. OH 71i), suffering, and death are her gifts, and she is often
described  in  bestial  terms.  Curse  tablets,  too,  invoke  this  dread  goddess  for  their
efficacy.
However, Hekate also received more formal worship in antiquity, both civic and
private. She was a goddess of crossroads (see line 1), and such places could receive
offerings and contain an image of the goddess. Sacrifices to her were notorious for their
use of dog meat as offerings (cf. line 5). Hekate was involved in mystery cults, and of
particular interest to this hymn is that Pausanias reports of mystery rites performed in
honor of Hekate on Aigina, rites that Orpheus himself was said to have introduced
(2.30.2). For more information on the worship of Hekate, see Larson 2007, pp. 165–
167.
1 of the roads and of the crossroads: The Greek word used here for “of the roads,”
“enodia,” was also the name of a local goddess at Thessaly, a land that in antiquity
was notorious for its connection with witches and witchcraft. For a particularly
gruesome literary representation of such, see Lucan Civil War 6.413–830, especially
434–506. The crossroads are understood here to be the confluence of three roads.
This number is of particular significance for Hekate, who is often described and
depicted as triple-faced and/or triple-bodied.
2 in heaven, on earth, then in the sea: Hekate has a share in these same three realms
in Hesiod's praise of the goddess. Her widespread powers are further invoked in line

7. The collocation of heaven, earth, and sea appears throughout the collection; see
OH 10.14–16+n.
2  saffron-cloaked:  The  same  epithet  is  used  of  Melinoe,  who  might  be  another
manifestation of Moon; see OH 71i+1n.
3 reveling: Hekate is described in terms of a wild Bacchant, a female worshipper of
Dionysos; see OH 52i. The appellation “mountain-roaming” in line 8 has similar
associations. Note also the Dionysian imagery implicit in the “herder of bulls” in line
7. Other goddesses described as maenads, or at least in maenadic terms, are the
Nereids  (OH  24.3+9–11n),  Artemis  (OH  36.2n),  Demeter  (OH  40.15+n),  the
Nymphs (OH 51.15–16+n), and the Erinyes (OH 69.2+n). Palaimon is also imagined
as part of a Dionysian thiasos (see OH 75.1+n).
4 daughter of Perses: The hymn follows Hesiod's genealogy, but we find others in the
sources. The poet Bacchylides, drawing on Hekate's chthonic pedigree, makes her
the daughter of Night (fragment 1b). Kallimakhos is said to have called her a
daughter of Demeter and Zeus, as do some Orphic sources (Orphic fragment 400),
and a sister of Persephone, whom she seeks in the underworld after her abduction by
Hades (Orphic fragment 466). Zeus is also her father according to Mousaios, but
Asteria, as in Hesiod, is the mother, before she marries Perses (fragment 87).
8 nurturer of youths: As mentioned in the introduction to this hymn, this was a
common  epithet  for  Artemis.  The  identification  is  also  suggested  in  line  4,
“delighting in deer,” as this animal often is connected with Artemis in her role as
“Mistress of Animals”; see OH 36i.
10 oxherd: This refers to some official of the cult. The figure is found in other
Dionysian mystery cults as well; for example, see Alexander 1933 for a summary of
a second century AD Greek inscription found near Tusculum that lists a number of
initiates and their titles and Morand 2001, 249–282, for a detailed study.
2. To Prothyraia
“Prothyraia” literally means “at the door” or “at the door-way.” There is no goddess
proper with this name. The word is a cult title shared by Eileithyia, Artemis, and even
Hekate. Our hymn identifies her primarily as Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, who
assists women in labor and who is invoked for a smooth delivery. Giving birth was
fraught with danger in antiquity both for the woman and the child; compare Medeia's
famous assertion that she would rather stand in battle three times than to give birth once
(Euripides Medeia 250–251). Artemis was also connected with childbirth (see OH

36.8), and this hymn explicitly equates all three goddesses at line 13. The chorus in
Aeschylus' Suppliant Women prays to Artemis-Hekate as the goddess who protects
women  in  childbirth  (674–677).  Moon,  who  is  often  identified  with  Artemis  and
Hekate, is called Eileithyia by Nonnus (Dionysiaca 38.150).
In myth and literature, Eileithyia is limited to her role in helping childbirth, most
famously in the Homeric Hymn to Apollon (3.97–116). Hera, angry at Leto for having
been impregnated by Zeus and about to give birth to Apollon, prevents Eileithyia from
hearing about Leto, who is suffering greatly on the island of Delos, since she cannot give
birth  until  Eileithyia  comes.  The  other  goddesses  send  Iris  with  a  bribe  to  coax
Eileithyia from Olympos. As soon as the goddess sets foot on the island, Leto goes into
labor. In Ovid's account of the birth of Herakles (Metamorphoses 9.273–323), Eileithyia
(spelled Ilithyia and also called by her Roman name, Lucina) sits by an altar outside the
door of the house of the pregnant woman. She bunches her knees against her chest,
holds them together in an embrace with her fingers locked, and chants magic spells.
This is a case of sympathetic magic, where the goddess' position represents the blocking
of the infant's passage out of the womb. Galanthis, a serving girl, is able to trick the
goddess into releasing her knees, thus breaking the spell and allowing Herakles to be
born. Ovid's story is quite intriguing, since the goddess is sitting outside the doorway
and  employing  magic.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  poet  has  in  mind  the  epithet
“prothyraia,” and the use of magic suggests associations with Hekate as well as Moon.
Hera herself has connections with the timing of giving birth, too. In Homer's brief
account of the birth of Herakles (Iliad 19.114–119), Hera is the one who delays the
birth of the hero by holding back the “Eileithyias” (the plural is also found at Iliad
11.269–270), while causing another birth, that of Eurystheus, to occur prematurely.
Traditionally, Eileithyia is the daughter of Hera and Zeus, and the sibling of Hebe and
Ares (Hesiod Theogony 921–923); note that the opening address to Mousaios mentions
Eileithyia between Hebe and Herakles (an eventual wife/husband pair) at line .
Pausanias also reports that the Kretans considered the goddess a daughter of Hera
(1.18.5). Krete, in fact, boasts of a very early worship of Eileithyia. Homer mentions a
cave of Eileithyia at Amnisos, near Knossos (Odyssey 19.188), and this has been
corroborated with a listing in a Linear B tablet from Knossos, which calls for an offering
of honey for Eileithyia at Amnisos, as well as the archaeological record, which spans
from Neolithic to Roman times.
But Pausanias in the same passage mentions another account of Eileithyia, reporting
the view that the goddess came to Delos from those famous mythological people from
the far north, the Hyperboreans, in order to assist Leto in giving birth, presumably to
Apollon and Artemis. The cult of Eileithyia was established on the island and thence
spread  to  the  rest  of  Greece.  Pausanias  also  notes  that  the  Delians  sacrificed  to

Eileithyia and sang a hymn composed by Olen, a legendary poet and prophet—a figure
very similar to Orpheus. Pausanias mentions the hymn of Olen in two other passages
that suggest that this goddess might have been associated with an older cosmic power.
At 9.27.2, Pausanias tells us that in Olen's hymn Eileithyia is the mother of Eros.
Elsewhere, Pausanias remarks that Olen called her “the good spinner” and surmises that
Olen identified her with fate (8.21.3). We find a similar connection elsewhere. Both
Pindar  (Olympian  Odes  6.41–42  and Nemean  Odes  7.1–4)  and  Plato  (Symposium
206d2) represent Eileithyia working in tandem with the Fates at birth. A story of
Herakles'  birth  similar  to  Ovid's  by  the  Greek  poet  Nikandros,  summarized  at
Antoninus Liberalis 29, has the Fates assisting Eileithyia in preventing the birth; the
serving girl who tricks the goddess is transformed by the Fates and receives some honor
from Hekate and Herakles. Thus Eileithyia seems to have been imagined at times in the
form of a personal Tyche or the individual Good Daimon (see OH 72i and OH 73i).
The position of the hymn in our collection is pregnant with symbolism. There is an
emphasis on “birth” in the opening hymns, which are balanced by the last hymn
dedicated to Death (see also OH 87i). Thus the collection is framed by both life and
death, set in motion by the first hymn which addresses Hekate as “queen and mistress of
the whole world” (OH 1.7). Prothyriaia/Eileithyia, as already mentioned, is sometimes
identified with Hekate, so the transition is an easy one. Both Hekate and Eileithyia are
portrayed in their iconography as bearing torches. This might have significance for the
actual rite for which our hymns were composed, which probably began after nightfall
(see the introduction to the translation and OH 3i). The initiates could very well have
been carrying torches as the hymns were performed. Graf suggests that this hymn was
sung  as  the  initiates  proceeded  indoors  to  wherever  the  ritual  was  enacted
(Graf/Johnston 2007, p. 155).
3. To Night
Night (Greek Nux) is personified in Hesiod. She is born from Khaos along with her
brother Erebos, with whom she mates and bears Ether and Day (Theogony 123–125; see
also OH 5i). Night produces by means of parthenogenesis a brood of personified
abstractions, notably for our collection Death, Sleep, and the race of Dreams (Theogony
211–225; cf. lines –7 of this hymn and OH 85i). Hesiod also mentions Night in
connection with the geography of the underworld. She owns a house, where her children
Sleep and Death also live. Day lives there, too, but is never there at the same time at
Night; they only greet each other as one leaves and the other returns from the world
above (Theogony 744–761; cf. lines 10–11 and see also OH 78.4–5+n). Night perhaps
should be seen as belonging to a pre-Olympian generation of divinities in Homer. In the

Iliad, as Hera tries to cajole Sleep into inducing Zeus to slumber, Sleep maintains his
readiness to bring his gift to all gods, even Okeanos, the father of the gods (14.246, and
see OH 83i), but recalls the catastrophe barely averted the last time he put Zeus to sleep
against his will. At that time, he escaped the anger of Zeus by the intervention of Night
(implied to be Sleep's mother?), who is described as having power over immortals and
mortals and whom Zeus is hesitant to displease (14.256–261). It is not clear what place
Night has in Homer's cosmology, but the respect and fear Zeus shows and feels toward
her suggests that Homer considered her to be an old and powerful figure.
This is the role she has in various Orphic theogonies, where she is considered to be
among the earliest divinities. In light of the Homeric passage, it is first interesting to
note that Night gives Zeus oracular advice, e.g., on how to reconstitute the world
(Orphic fragment 241; cf. also 113 and 237). In the Rhapsodies there are up to three
individual Nights (see West 1983, p. 70, and Betegh 2003, pp. 141–142). The first one
existed before Protogonos (Orphic fragment 112–113). Another Night is the daughter of
Protogonos (Orphic fragment 148), who later abdicates his throne to her in the symbolic
passing of his scepter (Orphic fragment 168–171; see also OH 6i and OH 10.26+n; cf.
Iliad  2.100–108  for  similar  symbolism).  She  (or  a  third  Night?)  also  appears  as
Protogonos' lover and gives birth to Sky and Earth (Orphic fragment 149; see also OH
4i). In other theogonies similar to those ascribed to Orpheus, Night is one of the oldest,
if not the oldest, beings. Mousaios puts her among Tartaros and Aer (fragment 81),
while Epimenides places her alongside Aer as the two primeval beings (fragment 46).
Aristotle notes that even “the ancient poets” do not claim that the primeval beings
(mentioned are Night, Sky, Khaos, and Okeanos) “are king or rule,” but rather Zeus
(Metaphysics 1091b4–6). He does not name names, but it is possible that for Okeanos
he had Homer in mind, and for Khaos Hesiod. Night and Sky do not correspond to any
known theogony, but, the fact that our collection has a hymn to Night as “mother of
gods and men” followed by a hymn to Sky who is called “father of all,” suggests that
perhaps there was such an Orphic theogony, now lost to us, circulating in antiquity and
well known by Aristotle's time; see OH 4i and also OH O.24, where Night is called
“oldest of all.”
In terms of cultic worship, there are very few instances. Pausanias mentions an oracle
of Night on the acropolis of Megara, along with a temple to Dionysos, a temple to Zeus,
and a sanctuary to Aphrodite (1.40.6). Note that Night has oracular powers in the
Orphic poems, as mentioned already. In Pergamon, where there was a mystery cult to
Demeter, religious officials dedicated a number of altars to various gods and goddesses;
one official, a hymnetria (a female singer of hymns), is attested to have dedicated an
altar to Night, Rites, and Happenstance (see Nilsson 1961, p. 355). The connection
between night and rites probably is indicative of the setting of the ritual. Likewise, the
early placement of our hymn as well as the appeal at the end for Night to make an

appearance before the initiates suggest that the rites for which the collection was written
probably began after sunset and proceeded throughout the night (see also OH 54.5+n,
OH 78i, OH 86i, and the introduction to the translation).
1 mother of gods and men: This is answered by “father of all” in the first line of the
following hymn to Sky. See also OH 10.1n.
2 Kypris: Another name of Aphrodite, used also at OH 22.7 and OH 65.7. It is
appropriate here of Night, who is given generative powers; cf. OH 55.2 where
Aphrodite is called “revered goddess of generation” and someone who “like[s] the
night-long revel.” Among the progeny of Night reported by Hesiod (Theogony 224),
we  find  Deception  (Greek  Apatē)  and  Sexual  Passion  (Greek  Philotēs),  both
representing characteristics normally associated with Aphrodite; see also OH 55i and
OH 59i. Just as Night, so too is Aphrodite called the “mother of gods and men” in
the magical papyri (PGM 4.2916), and she “give[s] birth to all” at OH 55.5 (cf. also
lines 3 and 12 of that hymn).
4 delight in the quiet: So too Moon at OH 9.8. Moon is also called “mother of gods
and men” in the magical papyri (PGM 4.2832–2833) and, in fact, even addressed as
Night (PGM 4.2857), among a host of other names.
6: These functions are normally handled by Sleep; see OH 85.8n.
8–11:  These  lines  have  many  echoes  in  the  following  hymn:  both  divinities  are
described as terrestrial (as part of their nature), both move in a circle, both are
constrained by Necessity; see OH 4.3n. Night can be considered both terrestrial and
celestial because, as alluded to in lines 10–11 and just as Hesiod describes (see the
introduction to this hymn), she alternates her time in the worlds above and below
with Day, and vice versa; see also OH 4.5n and OH 7.9n. Orpheus' address to
Mousaios  mentions  Night  and  Day  together  (OH  O.24).  That  she  is  always
incomplete suggests the continuity of Night and Day's alternation: Night is always
changing (cf. also OH 4.7n and OH 10.21–24n).
4. To Sky
Sky (Greek Ouranos) is one of the chief primeval figures in Greek mythology. As a sky
god, he is eventually supplanted by his grandson Zeus. In Hesiod's Theogony, Sky is son
and husband of Earth (126–153), and Kronos is their son who, in fact, conspired with
Earth to castrate his father (154–210). The marriage between Sky and Earth fits the
common mythological motif of the marriage between Father Sky and Mother Earth (see
also OH 15i). Their children are the (cosmic) Kyklopes, the Hundred-Handers, and the

Titans. Orphic theogony seems to have integrated, or at least borrowed liberally, from
the Hesiodic account that had become almost canonical. In the Rhapsodies, Night and
Protogonos  produce  Sky  and  Earth,  who  thereupon  marry  and  produce  children,
including the Fates, Kyklopes, and Hundred-Handers; the Titans, of whom there are
fourteen instead of the Hesiodic twelve (added are Phorkys and Dione; for the latter, see
OH O.19+n), are born from Earth without the knowledge of Sky. Night raises this
brood, and all of the Titans except Okeanos take part in the castration of Sky. As with
Hesiod, the Giants and Aphrodite are born from this act (Orphic fragment 149 and 174–
189; for Aphrodite Ourania, see OH O.40n and OH 55i+1n). In another version, Sky
and Earth are born from the two halves of the egg out of which Protogonos is hatched;
see OH 6.2n. Sky appears on the Bacchic gold tablets as well. In no less than twelve the
initiate claims to be born of Earth and “starry Sky” (nos. 1, 2, 8, 10–14, 16, 18, 25, 29)
and  in  three  of  these  to  be  of  the  “heavenly  race”  as  well  (nos.  2,  8,  29;  for
interpretation, see Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 111–116). This probably is intended to link
the initiate, as a human being, with the Titans, whose destruction by Zeus engendered
the human race (see OH 37i). A further connection between Sky qua “heaven” and
human beings might be in the notion that the soul, as the sky, is composed of fire; for
this idea, cf. OH 5.3 and see OH 66.9n.
Our hymn does not give much information about Sky's mythology, although there
would be little need since the initiates would know the story, whatever versions they had
at their disposal. Instead, Sky is treated here more as the vague personification of a
celestial phenomenon. This is not surprising, as Sky in myth is a rather colorless figure
whose function seems more to give the later gods an ancient pedigree than to serve as a
concrete expression of religious sentiment. Indeed, this might explain why the hymn to
Sky  appears  in  this  position  in  the  collection  and  before  the  one  to  Ether  and
Protogonos, both of whom come into existence before Sky. The hymn to Night opens
with reference to her role as “mother of gods and men” (OH 3.1), while Sky is called
“father of all” right at the start. There are other connections between these two hymns
that further reinforce their pairing (see notes passim). It is also suggestive that he is not
linked with Earth, as one would expect. Might, then, Sky be invoked as representative
of the masculine power of generation, being the oldest such being, paired with Night as
the feminine power of generation, also in turn being the oldest of her kind? It would fit
the pattern of hymns arranged in male/female pairings, a structural technique found
throughout the collection (see OH 14.8–9n). Furthermore, Sky is said to succeed Night
in a brief notice found in a commentary on Aristotle's Metaphysics by Alexander of
Aphrodisias, where the order of generation is given as Khaos, Okeanos, Night, Sky, and
Zeus, king of the immortal gods (Orphic fragment 370). It is possible that our composer
was aware of this or a similar cosmogony and was perhaps influenced by such to give
Night a male analogue (see also OH 3i). Sky, then, could be the son and/or junior

partner of Night. Be that as it may, the fact remains that this hymn to Sky breaks the
sequence Night-Ether-Protogonos that one might have expected based on our extant
sources (see further OH 5i).
1 father of all
: This continues the theme of birth found in the early hymns; cf. the first
line of the previous hymn to Night, “mother of gods and men,” and “the begetter of
blessed gods and mortal men” used of Protogonos at OH 6.3.
2 beginning of all, end of all: Zeus is also so addressed in the Hymns; see OH 15.7+n.
3  lord  of  the  universe,  moving  about  the  earth  like  a  sphere: This suggests a
geocentric view of the universe, as, for example, Ptolemy maintained (see OH
34.16–23n), as opposed to the heliocentric hypothesis of Aristarkhos of Samos
(third century BC), which might have been known to our composer. “Moving about
the earth” is also found at Kleanthes Hymn to Zeus 7, in the same exact position of
the hexameter line, used of the universe (kosmos) that dutifully obeys Zeus' rule.
Diogenes Laertius reports that Pythagoras was the first to call the sky “universe”
(8.48). Night in the previous hymn also moves in circular fashion (see OH 3.9+8–
11n). See further OH 7.8+n, OH 27.9n, and OH 40.15+n.
4 home of the blessed gods: Sky is “the firm seat of all the blessed gods” already in
Hesiod (Theogony 128); compare also OH 5.1+n. Hestia, too, is called the same
thing (OH 84.5).
4 your motion is a roaring whirl: Sun is similarly described; see OH 8.7+n. The word
translated as “roaring” is “rhombos,” which more properly designates either the bull-
roarer or kettle-drums, both of which were used in ecstatic and mystery cults,
particularly ones tied to Dionysos and the various Eastern mother goddesses; see OH
27.11n  and OH  31.2,  where  the  Kouretes  are  literally  called  “rhombosters”
(“rhombētai”). It is quite possible that in the performative context of our hymns such
an instrument would have been used and perhaps even supplemented the singing of
lines such as this one that indicate either the instrument itself or the sound it makes.
The rhombos is also one of the toys that the Titans used to lure the child Dionysos to
his death (Orphic fragment 306 and 578).
5 celestial and terrestrial guard: Sky participates in both parts of the cosmos (see
note to line 3); so, too, does Night (see OH 3.8+8–11n). Sky, insofar as he is
identified with the sky, naturally becomes viewed as a being who sees all that passes
under him, just like Sun and Zeus (see line 8 and OH 8.1n). Orpheus is said to have
called Sky both the “watcher and guardian of all things” (Orphic fragment 151), and
his name was at times thought to derive from the Greek word “ouros,” meaning
“watcher”; Plato Cratylus 396b–c gives an alternate etymology from a phrase in

Greek meaning “I look at the things above.”
6 Physis' invincible drive: The invincible drive is Necessity; see OH 55.3n. For the
personified Physis, see OH 10i.
7  shimmering,  variform:  There  is  a  play  on  words  in  the  Greek  (“panaiole,”
“aiolomorphe”). The reference here is probably to the changing nature of the sky due
to meteorological phenomena; cf. OH 3.8–11n.
8 all-seeing: A number of celestial divinities possess this attribute; see OH 8.1n.
5. To Ether
The upper atmosphere tended in antiquity to be divided into two levels: the lower, misty
air that we breathe and the higher, and hence purer, stratum of ether. This conception is
already found in Homer; at Iliad 14.286–288, Sleep climbs up the largest fir tree on
Mount Ida, which is said to “reach the ether through the air.” Ether is usually considered
to be composed of fire or to be fire itself. Hesiod tells us (Theogony 124–125) that
Ether and Day were born from Erebos and Night (it is interesting to note that two dark
entities produce two bright ones, as light follows day in Genesis). Ether is one of the
primordial beings in Orphic cosmogony (Orphic fragment 78 and 111). Along with
Khaos and Erebos, he was born from the serpentine Time. The cosmic egg out of which
Protogonos hatched is said to be either made out of, or placed in, Ether by Time (see
OH 6i+1n), and thus Ether is considered his father (Orphic fragment 124–125). This
probably  explains  why  the  hymn  to  Protogonos  immediately  follows,  intervening
between this hymn and those to the other celestial entities: the Stars, Sun, and Moon.
However, as with Sky, Ether is presented less as an anthropomorphic deity and more as
a cosmic principle in the form of the highest and purest expression of fire. Both deities
are connected, with Sky presented as an embodiment of physical space and Ether as
physical substance constitutive of that space. This may have facilitated Sky's placement
in the collection; see OH 4i.
1 Zeus' lofty dwelling: Zeus is often imagined as inhabiting the ether (e.g., Iliad 4.166,
Hesiod Works and Days 18, and Orphic fragment 852). It is an appropriate location
for a sky god, and, as ether is connected with fire, for a god who wields the fiery
lightning bolt; see OH 19i. Note that Hestia is called “home of the blessed gods” (OH
84.5), and she, too, is strongly connected with fire. Sky, who is closely associated
with the ether, is also the “home of the blessed gods” (see OH 4.4+n).
2: The stars, sun, and moon all are located in the upper air, and so Ether may rightly be
said to “claim a share.” But since Ether is a bright, primordial being that appears

before the others in cosmological speculation, he might be thought to “claim a share”
in the sense that he was the first to perform the functions of the younger beings;
children abrogating their parents' prerogatives is a recurring theme in mythological
thought. Note that the Stoics held that the sun, stars, and even the moon were formed
from the ether (see, e.g., Long and Sedley 1987, fragment 47D and Plutarch De
facie quae in orbe lunae apparet 928c–d, where this view is rejected). Even more
pertinent here is that all celestial phenomena—ether, sun, stars, moon—are said to
be “parts of Hephaistos” at OH 66.6–7, who is conceived as a quasi-personified form
of the element fire. The order “stars—sun—moon” in this line mirrors the order of
their respective hymns and is probably intentional.
3 life's spark for every creature
: For the soul as composed out of the element fire, see
OH 66.9+n.
4 best cosmic element: Empedokles' theory of the four elements (or, as he called them,
“roots”) that constitute the physical world was accepted—with some variations and
elaborations—throughout  antiquity.  They  are  earth,  water,  air,  and  fire;  these
manifest themselves in larger physical bodies, i.e., the earth proper, sea, lower air,
and ether, whose fiery and luminous qualities are mentioned in the surrounding lines
of this hymn; see also OH 11.2–3+n and 13–17. For the use of the four elements as a
structural motif in the collection, see OH 15i. That Ether (i.e., fire) is the “best” of
the four may be a reflection of Pythagorean and/or Stoic doctrine, which regarded
fire as the element at the head of the creation of the universe and into which all
physical bodies eventually disintegrate. Hephaistos qua fire is called the “blameless
element/most sublime” (OH 66.4–5+n).
6 temperate and clear: Ether is here being treated as a weather phenomenon, not as a
cosmic  force,  almost  loosely  being  identified  with  the  sky.  We  find  a  similar
conception at the end of the hymn to Boreas, the north wind, where there is also a
request for fair weather and mention is made of Ether and the sun's rays (OH 80.5–
6+n). Sun is called “the clear” (OH 8.14) with the same connotation of favorable
weather, and the Kouretes are asked to bring “clear weather” in their second hymn
(OH 38.24–25).
6. To Protogonos
Protogonos (First-born, Primeval) is the name/epithet of one of the most important
figures in Orphic cosmological speculation. This being has many appellations: Phanes
(Bright One), Metis (Counsel, Resourcefulness, Wisdom), Eubouleus (He of Good
Counsel), Antauges (The One Reflecting Light), Eros, among others. He shares with

Dionysos the names Eubouleus, Erikepaios, and Bromios and is indeed identified at
times with Dionysos himself (see OH 52.6+n) as well as Zeus. For convenience and
consistency, we shall refer to this god as Protogonos. In the cosmogonies found in the
Rhapsodies and in Hieronymos' account, Protogonos is born from an egg that Time has
a role in creating (see note to line ) and is a teratomorphic creature. He is portrayed
with golden wings, and he seems to have been described in the Rhapsodies as having
four (pairs of) eyes, four heads (ram, bull, lion, serpent; cf. Euripides Bacchae 1017–
1019 and OH 50.5n), and four (pairs of) horns, while in Hieronymos' cosmogony he has
bulls' heads growing from his sides and a serpent's head that nonetheless resembles all
kinds of beastly shapes (Orphic fragment 80 and 129–136). Protogonos is the first
“king” of the universe (Orphic fragment 165–167; cf. 86), who later passes this title on
to his daughter/lover Night (see OH 3i). We find Protogonos described as creating the
various attributes of the (material) universe and the gods themselves (Orphic fragment
144–164; see also line 3 and note); it is no accident that the following hymns in our
collection are addressed to the Stars, Sun, Moon, and Physis. Moreover, Ether plays a
role in the birth of this god (see OH 5i), and the placement of the hymn to Ether before
this one is probably a reflection of this genealogy. Protogonos is the first name in one of
the Bacchic gold tablets (no. 4). This tablet is very strange: it is in the form of a prayer
addressed to a number of divinities (including Phanes, who is listed some distance apart
from Protogonos) with nonsensical groups of letters sprinkled throughout. A relief from
Modena (second century AD) depicts a figure that appears to have some connection with
Protogonos (see West 1983, pp. 253–255).
1 two-natured: This probably refers to Protogonos' androgyny. The same word is used
of Dionysos (OH 30.2), Mise (OH 42.4), and Eros (OH 58.4); Mise is also explicitly
called both male and female. See also OH 9.4n.
1 ether-tossed: In the Rhapsodies, Time places the egg from which Protogonos is born
in Ether (Orphic fragment 114); in Hieronymos' version, Time fashions the egg out
of its children Ether, Khaos, and Erebos (Orphic fragment 78–79).
2: In the theogony attributed to Hieronymos, the bottom half of the egg becomes Earth,
the upper part Sky, and betwixt them is the “two-bodied” Phanes; see Orphic
fragment 80 and compare the two egg halves on the relief from Modena. The
separation  of  the  sky  and  the  earth  is  a  very  old  motif  found  in  Sumerian,
Babylonian, Egyptian, and Hittite cosmologies. The chorus of birds in Aristophanes'
Birds give an account of the creation of the world which includes an egg out of
which golden-winged Eros is hatched (685–704). Eros, traditionally represented as
winged (as in OH 58.2), is another name for Protogonos, as mentioned in the
introduction to this hymn. Similarly, an invocation to Eros in the magical papyri lists

a number of attributes that suggest an affinity with this Orphic divinity: golden-
winged, first-born, invisible, and yet light-producing (PGM 4.1748–1810). It is not
clear, however, if Aristophanes is drawing from an Orphic source. Protogonos' birth
from the egg is not attested until later, so this could have been influenced by
Aristophanes or perhaps it comes from a common third source (which need not
originally have been Orphic). We should also keep in mind that Aristophanes is more
interested in eliciting a chuckle rather than dutifully reporting actual cult practice
and that what he presents is being filtered through the fun-house mirror of comedy.
It  is  reflecting  something,  but  what  that  “something”  might  be  is  difficult  to
determine without sufficient comparanda.
3 begetter of blessed gods and mortal men
: An attribute he shares with Zeus, who in
the Rhapsodies is said to have swallowed Protogonos under the direction of Night
and from this act reenacted the creation originally performed by Protogonos (see OH
15.3–5n). Okeanos is also similarly addressed in the collection (OH 83.2), and Pan,
who is sometimes identified with Protogonos, is the “begetter of all” (OH 11.10).
Also in the Rhapsodies, Protogonos is said to carry “the famous seed of the gods”
(Orphic fragment 140), and this is probably what “of the many seeds” (line 10) is
intended (in part) to indicate (note, too, that Physis is a “giver of wealth of seeds”;
see OH 10.19). Protogonos is strictly speaking not the first being in the various
Orphic theogonies, but he is “first-born” in the sense of being the first to come into
existence by a kind of procreation (via the egg) and/or the first god to procreate in
the narrow sense of sexual intercourse (albeit with him/her/itself). This ambiguity is
underlined by the direct juxtaposition of “begetter” and “seed” in the Greek text as
well as by the different connotations of “seed” in the Greek language that this hymn
exploits.  The  “seed  unforgettable”  in  line  4,  as  the  singular  implies,  refers  to
Protogonos  himself  (see  also OH  50.2+n),  while  the  “many  seeds”  in  line  represents his cosmic generative powers. A similar oxymoron is found in line 5,
“ineffable, hidden, brilliant scion” (see also note to line 8). Dionysos/Erikepaios is
addressed as “father and son of the gods” in OH 52.6.
3 bellows like a bull: As mentioned in the introduction to this hymn, the head(s) of a
bull are part of the physical makeup of this composite being; cf. Orphic fragment
130:  “discharging  bulls'  bellows  and  those  of  a  fierce  lion.”  This  animal  is
particularly connected with Dionysos, who can take the form of a bull or otherwise
shares the features of a bull; see OH 30.3–4n.
4 Erikepaios: This non-Greek name also appears in OH 52.6 as an alternate name to
Dionysos; note, too, that the word translated there as “primeval” could also be
understood as the proper name Protogonos (and see note to line 3 “begetter of

blessed gods and mortal men” above). The late author Malalas says that the name
means “giver of life” (Orphic  fragment 97). An alternate version of the name,
Irikepaios, appears in a fragmentary papyrus from the middle of the third century BC
(the Gurôb Papyrus), where it is invoked along with Eubouleus, Pallas, and perhaps
Protogonos and Demeter and where it might be another name for Dionysos; see the
translation in Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 188–189. The line “attended by many rites”
has been taken by scholars as evidence for the widespread appearance of this god in
actual Orphic practice. An altar from the second century AD at Hierokaisareia in Lydia
was dedicated by a hierophant to “Dionysos Erikepaios.”
–7 in whirring motion... you whirled about throughout this world: The verb that
appears in this hymn as “whirled” (“dinētheis”) is found in an interesting fragment
preserved by Macrobius where the name Dionysos is fancifully derived from it
(Orphic fragment 540). In this fragment, Time reveals to the gods a being known by
the names Eros, Phanes, Dionysos, Eubouleus, and Antauges (also mentioned in line
9 of our hymn). For Eubouleus, see OH 41.8n. As for the “whirring motion” of line
5, a similar description of movement is found for Sun and others in the Hymns; see
OH 8.7n.
8: Another oxymoron (see note to line 3). Despite being invisible to the naked eye (cf.
line 5), Protogonos is the source of light and thus seems to take on a function similar
to Sun. Macrobius explicitly says that Orpheus called Phanes “Sun” (Orphic fragment
540). Although he has wings, he is also imagined to drive a chariot, much like Sun
(Orphic fragment 172–173), while Sun is occasionally described as winged in poetry
(see West 1983, p. 215). The name Phanes in antiquity was connected with light, as
here, or sometimes with the verb “phainō,” which in its active sense means to “show,
reveal” (Protogonos brings light to the universe for the first time; thus the hidden,
unrevealed being in turn “reveals” it) and its passive sense to “appear” (Protogonos is
“first-born,” being the first living thing to appear; cf. Orphic fragment 126).
9 Priapos: A curious reference. Priapos is connected with Dionysos in cult. According
to Athenaios, the people of Lampsakos even considered Priapos to be another name
for Dionysos (1.30b–c); however, Pausanias reports that they considered him to be
the son of Dionysos and Aphrodite (9.31.2). Inasmuch as Eros, a son of Aphrodite
in myth, is sometimes identified with Protogonos, this might have facilitated an
identification between Priapos and Protogonos, if Pausanias is correct. Then, too,
Priapos is a god with definite fertility connections, particularly sexual, and is usually
portrayed as ithyphallic (e.g., Boardman 1975, pl. 335.1). Such an association also
overlaps with Protogonos as a creator; see the note to line 3. Furthermore, Priapos is
a rustic entity, who protects flocks and gardens, and is sometimes found in Dionysos'

retinue. Thus in his functions, he bears a close affinity to Pan, another divinity that is
sometimes equated with Protogonos, and this is another possible avenue by which
Priapos could have been eventually connected with Protogonos; see also OH 11.10–
12n.
10 many counsels
: The Greek word “polumēti” puns on Metis, yet another name for
Protogonos (see the introduction to this hymn).
7. To the Stars
The stars did not receive cult honors in Greek religion, although some mystery cults,
notably  Mithraism,  did  call  on  the  stars  as  divine  beings  as  our  hymn  does.
Constellations were identified with various objects and personages already in Homer,
and they were employed to mark weather phenomena for agricultural and nautical
endeavors;  see  Hesiod's Works  and  Days  and,  for  a  more  self-consciously  literary
treatment, Aratos' Phainomena. In later antiquity the importance of the stars extended
to astrology, particularly in connection with the destiny of individuals; cf. the similar
role of Tyche (OH 72i). Heroes such as Herakles could be considered to have been
turned into stars upon their death. In classical times, there was popular belief that all
people became a star after their death (see Aristophanes Peace 832–841). This belief
lived on, but another conception, opposite to this one, developed in later antiquity. Each
star corresponded to a living person—a case of natural sympathy akin to the connection
between Hamadryads and their trees (see OH 51.14+n)—and a shooting star implied
that someone on earth had died (see Pliny the Elder Natural History 2.6). This belief
was  doubtlessly  connected  with  the  idea  of  the  stars  as  responsible  for  individual
destiny.  The  one  constant  in  these  various  views  is  the  conviction  that  celestial
phenomena are somehow connected with terrestrial affairs. Our hymn shares this view
but also treats the stars as minor divinities aloof from the humans whose fate they map
out in their nightly wanderings.
This hymn forms with the following two to Sun and Moon a triplet of ones dedicated
to celestial phenomena. They probably owe their position in the collection to their early
appearance in ancient cosmogonies; see further OH 6i.
2 holy daimones: Mythological figures are often connected with constellations, usually
as a result of transformation; for example, see the story of Callisto and Arcas in Ovid
Metamorphoses 2.401–507. Important gods were assigned to the planets, but lesser
ones to the stars. For example, the seven stars of the Pleiades were identified with
the seven daughters of Atlas, one of whom, Maia, was the mother of Hermes. The
association of specific deities with specific celestial bodies easily slides into a vague

notion that the stars are simply generic minor divinities, as is the case in our hymn.
3 children of black Night
: A genealogy based on observation. Hesiod on the other
hand says Dawn is the mother of the winds, the Morning Star, and—curiously—all
the stars (see OH 78i). West suggests that Hesiod started with the Morning Star
being a child of Dawn, which does conform to observation, and then brought all the
other stars into this relation “by association” (West 1971, pp. 270–271). It is possible
that Night is made their mother here because of the Stars' chthonic nature (see line and note), perhaps even to strengthen it. In Orphic cosmogony, the stars, as well as
the other celestial bodies, are created by Protogonos (Orphic fragment 153, and see
OH 6i) and then recreated by Zeus (see OH 15.3–5n). Note that the Fates are the
daughters of Night, too (OH 59.1).
8: This line, as well as the circular movement mentioned in line 4, refers to the place of
the stars in the cosmos according to geocentric astronomical teachings; see OH 4.3n.
The seven luminous orbits are the movements of the five planets (Mercury, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn), the sun, and the moon. They were conceived to be attached to
spherical rings and to rotate in perfect circles around the spherical earth. The stars in
this system usually were not thought to move but were understood to be affixed to
the outmost, inert sphere (for Plato, though, they moved, albeit in the opposite
direction from the rest of the celestial bodies; see OH 8.9n). The Homeric Hymn to
Ares also alludes to the seven orbits and, at least in part, addresses the planet as well
as the god. This information suggests that it is a late hymn that had been added to the
Homeric collection (see OH 65i).
9 in heaven and on earth: As with Night (OH 3.8+8–11n), their mother, and Sky (OH
4.5+n), so, too, are the Stars connected both to the celestial and earthly realms. Their
chthonic nature might also be a result of their connection with the dead. Sometimes
the soul is imagined as returning to the stars (see Cicero De respublica 6.18), and we
have already noted the old folk belief that stars are born when people die (see the
introduction to this hymn and further OH 15i and OH 59.3–4n).
12–13: These lines give us clues as to the content of the ritual in which our collection
was  employed,  but  not  enough  specific  details  for  any  certain  inferences.  The
“learned contests” might indicate a competition that was held among initiates or that
served as part of the rite for those about to be initiated. That they are “learned”
suggests they were intellectual and treated points of cultic lore. Perhaps they were in
the form of a catechism. The Stars, like other addressees in the collection, are
invited to join the festivities; however, what is unusual in this case is that it is not just
their presence but their direct participation that is desired. The word “race,” like the
Greek word it translates, “dromos,” may signify a competition or the mere act of

motion. The word “dromos” appears in the second part of a compound in line 9,
where it has the latter connotation (“puridromoi,” meaning “blazing trail”). It is often
used to describe celestial motion, and here it is “noble” because it is part of the
cosmic order, which has an ethical dimension (see OH 8.16n). Thus the stars' natural
course coheres with the movements of the ritual, and so the participants of the ritual
might have felt that they themselves also became participants in the cosmic order.
Another possible interpretation is that the context suggests an agonistic interpretation
of “race” but it is difficult to see against whom the Stars would be racing. In
Alkman's Parthenion (PMGF 1) the group of young girls, whose performance of the
poem is an act of worship in a state cult, at one point say they are “fighting” the star
cluster of the Pleiades; one interpretation of these hotly-debated lines is that the
girls, perhaps with (mock?) consternation, are worried that they will not finish their
nightly ritual before the Pleiades set and dawn appears. Our participants were almost
certainly engaged in a nightly ritual, too (see OH 3i), but there is nothing in our
hymn to suggest that they are competing with the Stars; indeed, the Stars are invited
to  join  the  proceedings.  Perhaps  the  Stars  are  summoned  to  help  the  initiates
complete their rite before the arrival of dawn (see OH 78i). In this case, the “works
of renown” would denote the ritual itself. The same phrase appears again of Nike,
who is asked to come to the initiates “for works of renown” (OH 33.9+i), and Mise is
also asked at the end of her hymn to attend the contests of the ritual (OH 42.11+n);
see also OH 28.2n, OH 30i, OH 76.12+n, and OH 87.12n.
8. To the Sun
The veneration of the sun in ancient times involves complexities. The only major cult
center was on the island Rhodes, but scholars suspect that this cult was not of great
antiquity. Pindar celebrates the island with three myths, including Sun's love of the
island; they produced seven sons, the ancestors of the island's inhabitants, and their
grandchildren became the eponymous founders of the three main cities on the island
(Olympian Odes 7.20–80). These cities combined to found the federal city Rhodes in
408 BC,  which  instituted  a  festival,  the  Halieia,  that  included  athletic  and  musical
contests. In 282 BC the inhabitants contracted the Colossus of Rhodes to be built, an
enormous bronze statue of the personified sun and one of the so-called seven wonders
of the ancient world. Rhodes, though, seems to be the main exception that proves the
rule;  references  in  Herodotos  (1.131),  Aristophanes  (Peace  406–413),  and  Plato
(Cratylus 397c) suggest that cultic worship of the sun and moon was considered to be a
characteristic of non-Greek cultures. Nevertheless, the sun did figure prominently as an
oath deity, as we see already in Homer (e.g., Iliad 3.103–104, invoked along with Earth

and Zeus). And there is evidence of more humble devotion. Children would clap their
hands and call for the sun to come out when a cloud obscured it (Aristophanes fragment
404). One might greet the sun and moon with a prayer or some other ritual action (e.g.,
Plato Laws  887d–e).  Such  an  act  is  reported  to  have  appeared  in  a  lost  play  by
Aeschylus, Bassarai  or Bassarides  (The  Thracian  Bacchantes).  According  to  the
summaries of this play we find in later sources, Orpheus, after his experience in the
underworld, neglected his previous worship of his father, Dionysos, and instead began to
venerate the sun, whom he called Apollon; he would climb Mount Pangaion (“pangaion”
means “all-earth”) to offer a prayer to the rising sun; Dionysos in anger incited the
Thracian Bacchantes at the end of one of their nocturnal revels to tear Orpheus apart
limb-by-limb (see Orphic fragment 536). The equivalence of Apollon-Sun seems to
have  been  first  made  by  philosophers  in  the  fifth  century BC  (Parmenides  and
Empedokles); a fragment of Sophokles also suggests this (see note to line  “Zeus”). In
the ideal city-state depicted in the Laws, Plato makes the highest magistrates priests of
both Apollon and Sun. The identification of these two divinities also occurs in the
Orphic corpus (Orphic fragment 102, 323, 413). A vase from Olbia, which may have
Orphic connections, contains this inscription: “Life Life Apollon Apollon Sun Sun
Cosmos Cosmos Light Light” (Orphic fragment 537; see also Graf/Johnston 2007, p.
188). It is unclear when this equivalence was first attributed to Orpheus, but Aeschylus'
play suggests at least the earlier part of the fifth century. This raises the interesting
question of whether the philosophers might have adopted the identification from an
Orphic cult or vice versa. Also connected with the name Orpheus is a hymn to Sun
(Orphic  fragment  538–545)  in  which  this  divinity  is  equated  with  Zeus,  Hades,
Dionysos, Eubouleus, Phanes, and Antauges (see OH 6i, and note to line 9 below). The
extensive identification speaks of Hellenistic provenance or later. Sun as a distinct being
does not play a large role in mythology. Probably the most important and famous story
is that of his son Phaethon, who asked for, and was given, leave to drive Sun's chariot;
but the lad was unable to maintain control the team and was killed by Zeus' thunderbolt
as the chariot careened to the earth, threatening a catastrophic conflagration (Ovid
Metamorphoses 1.746–2.400). More relevant to our collection is his interaction with
Demeter in identifying Hades as the abductor of Persephone; see note to line 1.
As with Sky, Ether, and Moon, the mythology and the cultic aspects of Sun are
absent from the hymn. It is Sun's place in the cosmic order—including its ethical
dimension—that is emphasized, and here the philosophical tradition has made its mark.
Many of the ideas can be traced back to the Pre-Socratics; see the notes passim. But
above all it is the traditional imagery that dominates by its repetition: the all-seeing eye
and the golden, life-nourishing light driven by the swift four-horse chariot. Compare this
hymn with the Homeric Hymn to the Sun, as well as Mesomedes' and Proclus' hymns to
Sun. He is also invoked in the magical papyri (see in particular PGM 1.297–327, 341–

347; 3.187–262; 4.436–461, 930–1114, 1928–2005; 8.74–81). See also OH 34i.
1 eternal eye that sees all
: Sun, in his capacity as a celestial god, is often portrayed as
perceiving all events that take place on earth. We list a few of the more famous
examples. It is Sun who finds out about the affair between Ares and Aphrodite,
Hephaistos' wife, and who informs the lame god of this indignity (Odyssey 8.270–
272 and 302). In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, Sun, along with Hekate (probably
in her capacity as moon-goddess), perceives Hades' abduction of Persephone (2.24–
27 and 62–90; see OH 9.3n and OH 41i). Finally, the fettered Prometheus calls to
witness a host of natural phenomena and concludes by invoking the “all-seeing orb of
the sun” at Aeschylus Prometheus Bound 88–92. The idea of Sun as witness is surely
related to his role in oaths; see the introduction to this hymn and note to line 17.
Other divinities described as all-seeing in the collection are Sky (OH 4.8), Moon
(OH 9.7), Apollon (OH 34.8 and 11), Zeus (OH 59.13), Nemesis (OH 61.2 and 8),
Dike (OH 62.1), and the Erinyes (OH 69.15, connected with Dike). The latter three
also connect perspicuous vision with justice (see note to line 16 below). The sun is
referred to as “the sublime eye of weightless fire” at OH 11.17.
2 Hyperion: This is actually the name of Sun's traditional father, one of the original
twelve Titans. For Hesiod's genealogy, see OH 9i.
3  self-born,  untiring:  The  idea  that  the  sun  reforms  each  day  goes  back  to  the
philosopher Xenophanes (Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983, no. 175) and perhaps
Herakleitos (Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983, no. 225; see also Kirk, Raven, and
Schofield's commentary on both fragments). It is also found in the magical papyri.
The phoinix, a legendary bird that was supposed to recreate itself from the ashes of
his father, was sometimes thought to radiate fire, and Herodotos (2.73) reports that it
brings the corpse of his father to the temple of Sun in Heliopolis, Egypt. That the
sun is born again anew every day is probably a reasonable, if fantastical, extension of
the observation that fire alone of the elements is capable of self-generation (see
Theophrastos On  Fire 1). The sun is already called “untiring” in Homer (Iliad
18.239, 484). Compare the opening of Mimnermos fragment 12.1–3: “For Sun has
obtained by lot a labor for all his days,/and there is never any respite/for his horses or
himself.” The Greek words translated here as “self-born” and “untiring” are also
used of Herakles in OH 12.9.
7 endless whirl: The same motion is ascribed to Sky (see OH 4.4+n) and Zeus the
Thunderbolt (OH 19.10); compare the motion of Protogonos, who is sometimes
identified with the sun (see OH 6.5–7+n), and likewise Physis (OH 10.21–24n).
9: The idea that heavenly bodies produce musical notes in their revolutions and that

together  they  form  a  harmony  goes  back  to  the  Pythagoreans,  perhaps  even
Pythagoras himself. Their views are probably what Aristotle describes in De caelo
290b21–29. In book ten of the Republic, Plato describes a system where there rotate
on the Spindle of Necessity eight whorls, on which the earth, sun, moon, planets, and
stars move; also on each whorl sits a Siren who utters a pure note of a certain pitch,
and they together produce a harmony; the three Fates sing along of the past, present,
and future (616b–617d). See also OH 7.8n. A late source reports that some believed
the seven notes on Orpheus' lyre were tuned to the rotations of seven celestial bodies;
for an account of how this developed and its probable Pythagorean origins, see West
1983, pp. 29–32, and OH 11i. Such an image could very well have influenced our
hymn, even though Sun should be producing one of the notes, not playing the lyre
that produces the whole harmony. The lyre is typically associated with Apollon; but
since the sun is associated with this god (see the introduction to this hymn, and note
to line  below), it would be natural to transfer this attribute to him, and, in fact, the
hymn to Apollon gives a fuller description of the cosmic lyre (OH 34.16–23+n). The
Stoic Kleanthes is reported to have called the sun “plektron” (literally, “instrument
for striking,” a musical technical term for “pick,” whence English “plectrum” via
Latin), whose rays strike the universe and produce a “course in tune” (Clement of
Alexandria Stromateis 5.8.48.1); Thom 2005 suggests this idea had been taken over
from the late fifth- or early fourth-century poet Skythinos of Teos (p. 78 n. 188).
Insofar as Sun is equated with Zeus in this hymn (see line 13 and note), Sun's
prominence in producing the full harmony, not merely being part of it, is also
understandable.
10 as you nurture the seasons: The same idea recurs in connection with the Kouretes,
albeit for a different reason; see OH 38.25.
11 piping lord of the world: Sun has already been described as holding the lyre, and
now we find that he is a piper as well. The whistling sound this instrument makes is
consistent with the type of sound implied by the rushing chariot (line 6) and the
“screaming whip” (line 19). The playing of pipes is usually associated with Pan, and
there are points of contact between this god and Sun in the collection. Pan's music is
described as an accompaniment to the cosmic harmony (OH 11.6), and he is also
called  “light-bringing  lord  of  the  cosmos”  (OH  11.11).  Furthermore,  Pan  is  a
“companion of the Seasons” (OH 11.4), a “begetter of all” (OH 11.10), a “veritable
Zeus with horns” (OH 11.12), and he brings “nourishment to mankind” (OH 11.20;
cf. line 12 of this hymn). Apollon may be added to this pair, for he is called Pan in
the context of his divine music that regulates the seasons (OH 34.24), and Pan, in
turn, is called Paian (OH 11.11), as Sun in the next line. Thus, these three divinities
are brought into relation with one another as beings who maintain the cosmic order.

12 Paian: For this name/title of Apollon, see OH 34.1n; for Apollon's identification
with the sun, see the introduction to this hymn. There are a number of overlapping
attributes between this hymn and the one to Apollon (OH 34).
13 father of time: Moon is called “the mother of time”; see OH 9.5+n. Herakles is also
called “father of time”; see OH 12.3+n.
13 Zeus: There are a number of attributes that Zeus and Sun share that would suggest
such a correspondence: both are sky gods, both are associated with fire and light,
both are believed to see all things, both are concerned with justice, and both were
invoked in oaths (often together). A late source cites the following fragment from
Sophokles (fragment 752): “O Sun, may you take pity on me/you whom the wise
[sophoi] call the begetter of the gods/and father of all.” The source introduces this
quote with the following: “those who believe that the sun is Zeus say that Sophokles
also calls the sun Zeus.” Since we do not know the original context, we cannot be
sure whether Sophokles actually intended to make this connection. The idea that
Zeus is the father of all things is a commonplace in Greek literature; in Orphic
cosmogony, this is taken literally (see OH 15.3–5n). The sun's role in producing life
on earth could easily have suggested an identification with Zeus.
16 a paragon of justice: Sun's role in oaths naturally connects this divinity with justice.
In a discussion of the etymology for “dikaion,” a word meaning “justice,” Sokrates
says that he heard from many men that justice is the element that moves through
(diaion) all things, which is the cause of generation, and that this is also why it is
connected with the irregular root of Zeus (“dia”); upon further inquiry as to the
nature of justice, one man claims it is the sun, since the sun governs all things,
another man says it is the essence of heat that resides in fire, and yet another man
holds,  after  Anaxagoras,  that  it  is  Mind  (Plato Cratylus  412c–413d).  Plato's
authorities might very well be the ones who are called “the wise” in Sophokles
fragment 752 (see note to line 13 “Zeus”), and Kahn 1979, p. 156, conjectures that
Plato's source might be Herakleitos or his followers. The idea that the physical nature
of the cosmos also consists of an ethical dimension—a type of universal that is the
standard to which the human sphere ought to attain—is found in some of the early
hymns (see also note to line 1, OH 7.12–13n and OH 10.14–16n) and is picked up
again later on (see OH 64i).
16 water-loving lord of the cosmos: Sun might be said to love the water due to the fact
that it signals the end of his laborious journey for the day. In mythology, Sun is
sometimes portrayed as riding a cup at night on Okeanos in his return east to rise
again  the  next  day.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  some  of  the  Pre-Socratics
(Anaximenes, Xenophanes, Herakleitos: see Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983, nos.

148–149, 175–179, 225, and their comments) and Stoics believed that the sun was
created or maintained by evaporation from bodies of water on the earth (see, e.g.,
Plutarch De stoicorum repugnantiis 1053a, De Iside et Osiride 367e).
17 guard pledges: This alludes to Sun's role as an oath god; see the introduction to this
hymn and note to line 1.
19  four-horse  chariot:  Sun  is  often  conceived  as  a  charioteer  in  Greco-Roman
literature and art. Festus, a second-century AD writer, in a note discussing various
horse sacrifices mentions one at Rhodes, where a four-horse chariot is driven into
the sea; he tells us that this symbolized the course of the sun as it traveled around the
world; see Burkert 1985, p. 175.
9. To Selene
Selene, whom we are calling Moon for consistency (see note to lines 1–2 below) had
very little role in Greek cult, even less than that of Sun, who at least had a major cult
center at Rhodes. Her importance in religion is due largely to her identification with
Artemis and Hekate. In later times, she was adopted into pre-existing cults, along with
other figures (e.g., Sun). Moon appears in magical texts, as well as a curse tablet from
Megara, but even in these cases she is not quite divorced from the other goddesses who
are identified with her. In our collection she is closely linked with the Stars and Sun,
both of whose hymns precede this one, and the obscure figure Melinoe might well be a
specific manifestation of Hekate as moon goddess (see OH 71i). Moon also does not
have much of a presence in myth. She is perhaps best known for her love affair with
Endymion; the story is first attested for Sappho (no text survives) and in modern times
is most famously retold in Keat's eponymous poem. In Hesiod's Theogony, she is the
daughter of the Titans Hyperion and Theia and the sister of Sun and Dawn (371–374).
In later times, she is sometimes said to be the daughter of Sun, this genealogy perhaps
reflecting a belief that the moon reflected the light of the sun (already postulated by
Anaxagoras; see Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983, nos. 500, 502), the inferior status of
the secondary light being expressed in genealogical terms. It is interesting to note that a
number of words describing the light of the moon in this hymn (and in the magical
papyri) are ones that more typically describe the sun's light. Orphic  fragment explicitly calls the moon “another earth” (see note to lines 1–2); for the moon's chthonic
associations, see OH 59.3–4n. We also find Mousaios addressed as the offspring of
Moon (Mousaios fragments 11t–14t); the same relationship was claimed by the Kretan
shaman Epimenides (fragment 33) and the oracle-monger Alexander of Abonoteikhos,
who slapped a human face on a snake and called it Asklepios (second century AD; Lucian

devotes an entire essay, Alexander, or the False Seer to vilify the man). Some accounts
hold that the Nemean Lion came from the moon.
As is the case with Sun in the previous hymn, Moon appears all but devoid of her
religious and mythical heritage. The focus is almost exclusively on the moon as an
astronomical phenomenon; in particular, the play of light and darkness seems to have
captured the imagination of the author. This hymn should be compared with the short
Homeric Hymn to the Moon. For Moon's role in magic, of particular interest are a series
of  prayers  and  invocations  to  Moon/Hekate  (PGM  4.2241–2358,  2441–2784).
Theokritos' second idyll is a literary account of love magic in which Moon is invoked.
Lucian parodies the idea of the moon as another world in his True History 1.9–27. See
also OH 1i, OH 36i, and OH 71i.
–2 Selene, / ... Moon: The hymn in quick succession invokes the moon under the two
names by which she was known. “Selēnē” is derived from the Greek noun “selas,”
“light, brightness, gleam” (compare Latin “luna,” “moon,” from “lux,” “light”; see
also OH 71i), and might have developed as a euphemism for the moon proper (Greek
“mēnē”). If this is correct, the demonic Hekate/Moon found in the magical papyri
would have quite an ancient pedigree. Orphic fragment 155, describing the creation
of the world by Protogonos (or its recreation by Zeus), also uses both names in close
proximity: “And he conceived another earth, boundless, which Selene/the immortals
call, but those upon the earth Mene;/it has many mountains, many cities, many
houses.” The idea that gods and mortals call the same thing by different names
appears elsewhere in epic poetry (e.g., the river Skamandros, Iliad 20.74) and this
also happens among different mortals (e.g., in the case of Hektor's child, Iliad
6.402–403). The preference in our collection for “mēnē” instead of “selēnē” might
be due to the Orphic fragment, where the former is the term that mortal men use.
3 torch-bearing: Both Artemis and Demeter are called “torch-bearing” in their hymns
(OH 36.3+n and OH 40.11+n); the same epithet is used of Hekate/Artemis/Moon in
the magical papyri (PGM 4.2559, 2718). The torch is one of the standard attributes
of Hekate. She, along with Sun, perceived Hades' abduction of Persephone. This
pairing implies Hekate's capacity as a moon goddess; indeed, the Greek word used
of the light of her torch is selas (Homeric Hymn to Demeter 2.52 see the note to lines
1–2 above and OH 1i). Torches are also standard in processions (see OH 40.11n) and
the iconography of maenads (see OH 52i).
4 feminine and masculine: A number of divinities are described as androgynous in the
collection: Physis (OH 10.18), Athene (OH 32.10), Mise (OH 42.4), and Adonis (OH
56.4). The goddess Artemis is also called masculine at OH 36.7. Protogonos is “two-
natured” (OH 6.1), and this probably refers to this being's androgynous nature; see

also Orphic fragment 80, 121, and 134. One might also compare two versions of an
Orphic hymn to Zeus, where the god, invoked as the embodiment of the cosmos, is
depicted by a number of complementary characteristics, including masculine and
feminine features, and in particular is asserted to be the sun and the moon (Orphic
fragment 31.4, 6; 243.3, 16). Likewise, Dionysos and Eros are also “two-natured”
(OH 30.2 and OH 58.4) which probably indicates dual gender. In the magical papyri,
we find Moon invoked thus: “I summon you, triple-faced goddess, Moon, lovely
light, Hermes and Hekate together, an androgynous shoot” (PGM 4.2608–2610). The
dual gender of Moon is curious, particularly since she is described as “mother of
time” in line 5, while Sun, who is not depicted as androgynous, is called the “father
of time” (OH 8.13). The masculine side of the moon might be an oblique reference
to  the  non-Greek  moon-god  Men  (pronounced  “main”),  whose  worship  was
widespread in Asia Minor and who is mentioned in Orpheus' address to Mousaios at
OH O.39, admittedly, however, far removed from the Moon's presence in line 4.
5 mother of time: Sun is called “father of time” in his hymn (OH 8.13). The ancients in
general employed a lunisolar calendar. The months were calculated by the phases of
the moon; indeed the words “moon” and “month” are cognate; compare also Greek
“mēnē” (“moon”) and “meis, mēnos” (“month, moon”) as well as Latin “mensis”
(“month”). However, in terms of a recurring pattern, a strictly lunar calendar quickly
falls out of step with the seasons, which are tied to the earth's circuit around the sun,
so  that  the  same  month  that  occurs  in  winter  will  occur  in  summer  within  a
generation. The ancients were well aware of this difficulty and so employed various
means to keep the solar year in tune with the lunar months. For detailed information
on Greco-Roman calendars, see Samuel 1972; for a more concise account on time
reckoning,  whose  scope  extends  beyond  ancient  Mediterranean  cultures,  see
Holford-Strevens 2005. The Demiurge in Plato's Timaeus creates the sun, moon, the
planets, and the stars to fix and measure time (38b–39e). Orphic fragment 156, in
the context of the (re)creation of the cosmos, says that the moon was given a month-
long orbit analogous to the year-long one of the sun.
6 amber-colored: See OH 71i.
7 all-seeing: Similar to Sun, Moon is able to see all things from her vantage point in the
celestial sphere; see OH 8.1n.
10 long-cloaked marshal of the stars: The moon, as the most conspicuous heavenly
body in the night sky, can naturally be conceived as the leader of the lesser lights. At
the start of the “Prayer to Moon” in the magical papyri, Moon is addressed as one
“who in the triple shapes of the triple Graces, dances with the stars in festive revel”
(PGM 4.2793–2795).

12: Light in Greek literature often connotes deliverance from some trouble. This line
seems to indicate that the rites performed with this collection took place at night (see
OH 3i).
10. To Physis
Physis (Nature) was conceived by the Greeks since early times as the loosely personified
sum total of the creative powers or creative genius of the cosmos at work. The word is
derived from the Greek verb “phuō” which means “I grow, I am (by nature)” (a word,
incidentally, cognate with English “be”). The notion, in both of its senses, was important
from  the  earliest  schools  of  philosophy.  Indeed,  there  are  a  number  of  ancient
philosophical treatises entitled “Peri phuseōs” (“On Nature”; cf. Lucretius' Latin poem
De rerum natura, “On the Nature of Things”). Our hymn conceives of Physis in such
vague terms as to render it very difficult to point to a definite connection with any
particular philosophical school. There do seem to be a number of resonances with the
Zeus in the Stoic philosopher Kleanthes' Hymn to Zeus, where the god is addressed as
the “originator of nature [phuseōs]” (line 2). He is also “many-named” and “master of
all” (line 1 ~ OH 10.4 and 13), “ruler” (2 ~ OH 10.3), mingled with celestial bodies (12–
13; cf. OH 10.6), has powers over the earth, heaven, and sea (15–16; cf. OH 10.14), and
is a “giver of all” (32 ~ OH 10.16), among other verbal overlaps. A familiarity with this
work  is  likely.  Interestingly  enough,  the  so-called  Pythagorean Golden  Verses,  a
collection of moral precepts of unknown date but certainly well known by late antiquity,
cast Physis in the role of a priestess in a mystery cult revealing secrets to the initiates:
“But take courage, for mortals have a divine origin,/to whom Physis displays and shows
each  sacred  object”  (63–64,  translation  by  Thom  1995).  The  language  here  is
suspiciously Orphic, as Thom discusses in his commentary on these lines (pp. 205–
212). An earlier pair of verses (52–53), which looks at the universality of nature (here
probably not personified), also admits of potential Stoic, Pythagorean, or even Orphic
provenance (see Thom 1995, pp. 190–191). Mesomedes composed a hymn to Physis,
identifying this divinity with Sun towards the end. He apostrophizes Physis with “O you
who kindle the whole world with your brilliant rays” (15–16) and calls Physis “Aion” (a
figure sometimes equated with Sun in the magical papyri; see OH O.28–29n), “Paian”
(= Apollon), and “Titan” (referring to Sun or his father, Hyperion; cf. OH 8.2, and for
this relationship, see Hesiod Theogony 134). As in the Golden Verses, the language of
mystery cults also appears in this hymn, as the poet calls on Sun-Physis to grant
blessings “to your Bacchant” (19–20). Further points of contact are mentioned in the
notes passim. The personified Physis also appears in the magical papyri in a number of
associations. She is mentioned immediately following Aion in a long list of invocations

(PGM 1.310), and possibly equated with Sun himself (PGM 4.939, but there is textual
corruption).  It  is  perhaps  not  too  much  of  a  surprise  to  find  her  identified  with
Aphrodite, given that goddess' strong connection with generative powers (PGM 4.2917).
This is perhaps comparable to the address as the “persuasion of the Graces” in line ,
as both the Graces and the personified Persuasion are traditionally connected with
Aphrodite (see OH 55.9n and OH 60i). Also due to the association with fertility is the
equation  of  Physis  with  Moon-Artemis-Hekate  (PGM  4.2832).  The  Physis  of  the
magical papyri shares some of the epithets used of this goddess in our hymn.
Our composer, then, has apparently appropriated an idea found in a number of
congenial contexts and adapted it to one suitable for the purposes of the collection.
Physis is here presented as the mysterious and ineffable power that infuses all of
creation. The position of the hymn is significant in this respect. There are many verbal
reminiscences  with  the  earlier  hymns,  and  the  birth  motif  makes  yet  another
appearance. Given that Hekate and Moon are often fused together as one entity, they
can be seen as functioning in the collection as a type of ring composition that bookends
the hymns to the cosmic powers, who are primarily presented in abstract terms. The
hymn to Physis, along with that of Pan, might very well have been intended as a
summary of this earliest stage of personified abstractions, which afterward gives way to
more anthropomorphic figures, starting with the twelfth hymn to Herakles. Note, too,
that the hymns to Physis and Pan are also verbally connected through the frequent use
of the Greek word “pan” (“all”) in this hymn, either as an independent word or as part
of compound.
1 mother of all: This is also used of Physis twice in the magical papyri: once in her
identification  with  Aphrodite  (PGM  4.2916–2917),  the  other  time  with  Moon-
Hekate-Artemis (PGM 4.2832–2833). An obscure poem from later antiquity on the
powers of plants calls physis (probably not to be personified) by the same epithet.
We find this and similar descriptive phrases applied throughout the collection to
various fertility figures: Night (OH 3.1), Rhea (OH 14.8–9), Demeter (OH 40.1),
Mother Antaia (OH 41.1–2), and Hygeia (OH 68.2). In particular, Earth can also
have the same epithet used here (see Aeschylus Prometheus Bound 90 and Orphic
fragment 243.27), and she is addressed as “mother of men and of the blessed gods”
in her hymn (see OH 26.1+n).
2 oldest of all: Mesomedes calls her the “oldest mother of the cosmos” in line 2 of his
hymn.
6–7: A similar sequence is found in line 3 of Mesomedes' hymn: “[you who are] night,
light, and silence.” Given the reference to mystic initiates in the following line of his
hymn, Mesomedes might be alluding to nocturnal ritual.

9: There are many instances of contradictory, or at least paradoxical, formulations
throughout  this  hymn  and,  indeed,  the  collection  as  a  whole.  See  lines  3,  (dark/bright), 8, 10, 17 (life/death), and 18. The idea of causing a quality without
possessing that quality itself is already found in Aristotle's notion of the “unmoved
mover” (and note that Mesomedes calls Physis a “first principle” in line 1 of his
hymn); see also line 21 of this hymn, where Physis is said to “[set] all in motion.”
10 self-fathered: Physis is called “self-growing” (the Greek autophuē is a pun on
phusis) in the magical papyri (PGM 1.310).
14–16: Physis is not just a concretization of the powers of generation but also is
responsible for the underlying ethical dimension of the world. She is Dike (meaning
“right”) personified (compare OH 62 and OH 63), and “virtue” (Greek “arētē”) in
line 10 might also be intended as a personification. See further OH 8.16n. Many
divinities are connected with the realms of heaven, earth, and sea in this collection.
Some, like Physis, are described as having dominion over them: Kybele (OH 27.4–
8), Aphrodite (OH 55.4–7), and her son Eros (OH 58.5–7). Aphrodite is also said to
be the source of these three spheres, as are Rhea (OH 14.9–10) and Zeus (OH 15.3–
5), whose descent as the thunderbolt also affects the same areas (OH 19.12–19). Pan
(OH  11.13–18)  and  Nomos  (OH  64.2–4)  keep  everything  in  its  place.  Some
divinities are described as dwelling in these locations: Hekate (OH 1.2), Pan (OH
11.2–3, where fire, probably a metonomy for ether, is also included), Proteus (OH
25.6–9, where he is the locus of creation by Physis), and the Kouretes (OH 38.2). In
the opening address to Mousaios, Orpheus at one point invokes all the gods of the
sky, air, water, earth, underworld, and ether (OH O.32–33). In a related vein, the
animals that inhabit the land, air, and sea are listed at OH 37.5 and OH 78.11–12.
This motif is related to that of the four elements (see in particular OH 11.2–3n).
Heaven, earth, and sea figure prominently in various stories of creation. In particular,
note the song of Orpheus at Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika 1.493–502, and
compare the song of Silenos at Vergil Eclogues 6.31ff., where, before his song
begins, Silenos is compared favorably to Apollon and Orpheus. See also OH 34.11–
15+n.
18 father and mother of all: The earlier hymns to Night and Sky (OH 3 and OH 4)
form a generative pair. Sun and Moon, as father and mother of time (OH 8.13 and
OH 9.5), are similarly related, while Moon herself is both masculine and feminine
(see OH 9.4+n). Mesomedes addresses Physis in line 2 of his hymn as the “oldest
mother” but his later identification of the goddess with Sun-Aion-Apollon (15–20)
suggests that he also saw this first principle (see line 1 of his hymn) as androgynous.
19 swift birth: Prothyraia-Eileithyia in OH 2.4 and Artemis in OH 36.8 are also called

goddesses “of swift birth.”
19 giver of wealth of seeds: The same Greek epithet is used of Protogonos (OH 6.10,
where it is translated as “of many seeds”); see also OH 6.3n.
21–24: Possibly a reference to the river Okeanos, whom Homer calls the “begetter of
all” (see OH 83i). Physis, like this river and other personified celestial phenomena
(Sky in OH 4.4, the Stars in OH 7.4, Moon in OH 9.10; see further OH 8.7n), is also
conceived as moving in a circle (also compare Kleanthes Hymn to Zeus 7). She is
constantly changing her form in the sense that she produces an astonishing variety of
living beings (cf. OH 3.8–11n).
26 those who hold the scepter: Mortal kings are the ones who usually hold the scepter.
In the Rhapsodies, we find mention of a six-part scepter (Orphic fragment 166),
which seems to refer to the sequence of six rulers of the cosmos (Protogonos, Night,
Sky, Kronos, Zeus, and Dionysos), while Night is explicitly said to hold the scepter
she obtained from Protogonos (Orphic fragment 168 and 170, and see OH 3i and OH
15.6+n).
27 all-taming, ... fire-breathing: The same epithets are used of Ether at OH 5.3. The
association with fire is perhaps related to the identification of Physis with Sun in
other sources (see the introduction to this hymn) and, along with the following line
(“you are life everlasting”), perhaps also is to be connected with the idea that the soul
is composed of fire (also OH 5.3; see further OH 66.9+n).
11. To Pan
Pan is a divinity with an interesting history. He originally appears to have been a
woodland god in Arkadia, one who roamed the mountains, hunted small game, and
frolicked in song and dance with nymphs. He is traditionally represented as a bearded
man with horns on his head, whose upper body is human and whose lower parts are
capriform. Later considered to be the quintessential symbol of paganism, his features
were adopted in representations of the Christian devil. Pan was worshipped in Arkadia
with the traditional accoutrements of Greek religion (see, e.g., Pausanias 8.37.10), but
outside of this area he was typically venerated in sacred caves or grottos. Herodotos
(6.105) narrates a tale from the Persian invasion of Attika: the Athenians sent an
accomplished runner, Philippides, to the Spartans in order to solicit their help, and,
while he was passing through a mountain in Arkadia, the god appeared to him and
asked why the Athenians did no honor to him, although he had helped them in the past
and would do so again in the future. After the battle of Marathon, the Athenians

decided to make good their past neglect by dedicating a cave on the northwest slope of
the Akropolis to Pan. One feature of their worship of Pan was a torch-race, and it is
interesting that one of the sanctuaries of Pan in Arkadia had a racetrack, according to
Pausanias (8.38.5).
Pan was often invoked along with Hermes and the nymphs. Indeed, like Hermes, he
can multiply flocks and bring good fortune to those he chooses. An example of this may
be seen in one of the caves of the ancient marble quarry on Paros; there at the entrance
one finds a Hellenistic frieze depicting Pan and the nymphs. A further connection with
Hermes is found in many of the versions of Pan's genealogy. He is usually represented
as the son of Hermes, often through a nymph, as in the Homeric Hymn to Pan, where
the mother is the daughter of Dryops. We also find Penelope, the wife of Odysseus,
claimed to be the mother, with Hermes, Apollon, or even all the suitors as the father.
The Arkadian connection is also seen in variations that make Zeus the father and
Kallisto, a nymph and mother of Arkas, the eponymous hero of Arkadia, the mother.
Other parentages are considered below.
Pan was connected with sudden bouts of fear or madness (whence English “panic”),
already in the Classical period (e.g., Euripides Medeia 1172). The Homeric Hymn to
Pan alludes to this attribute in the birth of Pan. When the mother and nurse see the
baby born with a beard and goat features, they run away screaming, while the father,
Hermes, happily scoops up the infant in his arms and brings him to Olympos; all the
gods delight in the baby, Dionysos most of all (19.27–47; see also OH 14i and OH
46.7n). Pan's madness could overtake men and beasts in the lonely places of mountains,
and sometimes the explanation is put forth that this was due to a sudden gust of wind
from the instrument of Pan, the panpipes, constructed out of a number of reeds bound
together and stopped with wax (see below and the notes to lines  and 9). In literature
and iconography Pan is often portrayed carrying this instrument. It was also supposed
that “panic” was a frenzy occasioned by being directly possessed by the god; see OH
52.7–8n and cf. OH 30i+4n.
It is perhaps this notion of madness and possession that brought Pan into the orbit of
ecstatic and mystery cults. As already mentioned, he is particularly tied to Dionysos in
the Homeric Hymn  to  Pan,  and  he  is  often  found  in  the  Dionysian thiasos. Both
divinities also share a connection with pastoral settings and nymphs. Pindar brings Pan
together with Mother: he puts him in her retinue (Pythian Odes 3.77–79) and calls him
the “attendant” (fragment 95) and “dog” (fragment 96) of the goddess. Pan is associated
with other divinities connected with madness. The nurse in Euripides' Hippolytos asks
Phaedra if she is possessed by Pan, Hekate, the Korybantes, or Kybele, the mountain
mother (141–144); see also OH 27.8n. Madness and frenzy play a role in our hymn and
elsewhere in the collection with similar entities; see OH 27.13n and OH 71.11n. One

obscure genealogy of Pan makes him the son of Ether and a nymph named Oinoe.
Given the role of Ether in Orphic mythology, it is tempting to see an Orphic source for
this notice. Mysterious, too, is the story of the death of Pan, told by Plutarch at De
defectu oraculorum 419b–e. As a ship was heading up the coast of Epiros in northwest
Greece at the time of the Emperor Tiberius, a voice from an island called out to the
Egyptian helmsman Thamous, who ignored the voice twice but responded after a third
time. The voice bade him to announce to the land by Lake Palodes that “Pan the Great
has died.” Thamous does so, and even before he finishes his words, groaning and shouts
of amazement were heard from somewhere on land.
Possibly also in the context of mystery cults there developed the notion of the
“cosmic” Pan as found in our hymn. It was sometimes claimed that he did not have any
parents but was “without a father” or “autochthonic” and “earth-born.” One obscure
writer calls Pan “celestial.” Of particular interest is a recurring notion that the physical
constitution of Pan symbolizes the entire universe. The horns on his head represent both
the rays of the sun and the horns of the moon. His ruddy complexion is the ether. The
leopard or fawn skin he wears (a typical article of clothing for a follower of Dionysos),
being spotted, refers to the stars in the sky. His hairy lower shanks correspond to the
trees and shrubbery that clothe the earth, and his hard goat hooves suggest the stability
of solid ground (cf. also OH 10.14–16n and OH 15.3–5n). Two other notable attributes
are mentioned by Servius in his commentary on Vergil's Eclogues 2.31. He says that the
shepherd's crook that Pan holds, because it is curved back, points to the recurring year
and that the panpipes he holds are made up of seven reeds, corresponding to the seven
notes of the cosmic harmony. In this context Servius refers to Vergil Aeneid 6.645,
where Orpheus (the “Thracian priest”) is depicted in the Elysian Fields, playing his
seven-stringed lyre. Note, too, that Sun in his hymn is represented as playing the cosmic
harmony by the lyre and by piping (OH 8.11+n). It is unclear where Servius is drawing
this connection between the music of “cosmic” Pan and Orpheus, although it is likely he
has the poem entitled Lyre in mind, which was attributed to Orpheus (Orphic fragment
417–420; see also West 1983, pp. 29–32). It is also suggestive that in the Orphic
theogony reported by Hieronymos, Protogonos was called Zeus, who, as master of the
entire cosmos, was also known as Pan (Orphic fragment 86; see also note to lines
–12). In this context, note that Silenos, a figure with much affinity with Pan, sings a
song of creation at Vergil Eclogues 6.31ff. (see OH 10.14–16n).
This identification of Pan and Zeus helps explain why Pan became a god whose
domain extends over all creation. The Greek word for “all, whole, entire” is “pan,” and
we  find  such  etymologizing  explanations  mentioned  elsewhere  in  the  context  of
“cosmic” Pan (cf. OH 25i). This seems to be a later development, though, and other
explanations of this god's name were offered earlier. In the Homeric Hymn to Pan, it is
explained he was called Pan because “all” the gods took delight in him (19.47). Writers

who make “all” the suitors of Penelope the father of this god offer a more salacious
hypothesis. The root “pa” seen in the Greek “*pasomai” (“I will acquire”) and Latin
“pascor” (“I feed, graze on”) is a more likely ancestor to the name Pan. He is the god
who nourishes the flocks and can increase their number.
This  hymn,  like  Pan  himself,  is  a  hybrid  mix,  combining  a  charming  rustic
materialism with the sublime power that permeates all creation. Similar to Physis in the
previous  hymn,  Pan  is  connected  with  growth  and  nourishment  of  life  (note  the
appearance  of  the  birthing  motif  again).  Indeed,  the  epithet  “begetter  of  all”
(“pantophuēs”) in line 10 combines words that are cognate with both divinities. And
also like the previous hymn, this one serves as a summary of the cosmic powers already
honored  (see  also OH  10i).  Thus  Pan  functions  as  a  transition  to  the  more
anthropomorphic figure of Herakles of the next hymn.
One detail that perhaps is not directly relevant to this hymn but deserves mention is
that Herodotos in his digression treating Egypt in book two of his Histories mentions
that the Greek divinities Dionysos, Herakles, and Pan have a different chronology from
their Egyptian counterparts (2.145). For the Greeks, the order of birth is Dionysos,
Herakles, Pan (Herodotos making him the son of Penelope and Hermes, and thus born
after the Trojan War), while the Egyptians place their Pan among the eight primeval
gods (the Ogdoad), Herakles among the subsequent dynasty of the twelve gods, and
Dionysos in a third dynasty. While admittedly there is little Egyptian influence on our
collection, it is certainly possible that a distant source for the “Titan” Herakles in the
subsequent hymn was influenced by the same account related by Herodotos (or even by
Herodotos' account itself).
2–3: The sky, sea, land, and fire (probably the ether is meant) correspond to the four
elements: air, water, earth, and fire (see lines 13–18, OH 5.4n and OH 14.9–10n). A
similar broad range of domains is found in many hymns in the collection; see OH
10.14–16n.
5 reveling: The word has distinct Bacchic connotations, and Pan has a special relation to
Dionysos; see the introduction to this hymn and OH 52i.
7 fantasies of dread: A reference to Pan's madness, which he is asked to banish at the
end of the hymn. A number of divinities in the collection have similar powers; see
OH 71.11n.
9 dance with the Nymphs, ... lover of Echo: Pan is often found carousing with
nymphs, and there are a number of similarities between this hymn and the one to the
Nymphs (OH 51). The two are mentioned in the same line of Orpheus' address to
Mousaios (OH O.15). Despite Pan's proud assertion of bachelorhood in Lucian's

humorous portrayal of the god (Dialogue of the Gods 22), in mythical tradition he is
involved in a number of failed relationships. The most famous one is with the nymph
Syrinx, memorably told by Ovid (Metamorphoses 1.689–712). She rejects Pan's
advances and, as she flees from him, is turned into a clump of reeds. When Pan
reaches to grasp her, he finds instead the bunch of reeds in his hands. He sighs, and
his breath goes through the reeds and produces sweet music. Thus did Pan invent the
panpipes (Greek “surinx”), a common attribute of his evermore. Another nymph,
named Pitys, rejected Pan and she was turned into a pine tree (Greek “pitus”). Our
hymn directly refers to Echo, who is usually associated with Narcissus. However, she
is sometimes an amorous interest of Pan, and, like Syrinx and Pitys, rejects his
advances. In Longus' novel Daphnis and Chloe (3.23), Daphnis explains to his lover
Chloe the origin of the “echo.” The nymph Echo was taught by the Muses in every
sort of singing and musical instruments. Pan, in anger over her skills and at the fact
that she fled from him, sent his madness to the shepherds and goatherds, who
promptly tore Echo apart. As a favor to the Muses, Earth echoes back sounds just as
the nymph was able to do when alive. This story has interesting parallels to that of
Orpheus, famed for his music and, in some accounts, torn to shreds by maenads
maddened by Dionysos, either because Orpheus had stopped venerating the god or
because the nymphs themselves were enraged that Orpheus had sworn off women
after the death of Eurydike; see also OH 87.9n. For the ripping apart of an animal as
part of maenadic ritual (sparagmos), see OH 52i. Pan is sometimes considered to be
the source of echoes himself. It is not always easy to determine whether a writer has
in mind “echo” or “Echo” in connection with Pan (see, for example, Homeric Hymn
to Pan 19.21). For Pan and nymphs in cult, see OH 51i.
10–12  many-named  divinity...  veritable  Zeus  with  horns: Pan is called “many-
named” and then in quick succession we have a number of identifications. Zeus is
directly mentioned, and Pan's role as “begetter of all” fits in well with Zeus' role as
father of gods and men in the tradition. As noted in the introduction to this hymn,
Zeus is called Pan in Orphic fragment 86. Another fragment calls Zeus “the god of
all and the mixer of all” (Orphic fragment 414); the Greek words for “mixer” and
“horned” are the same (“kerastēs”), except they are accented differently. There may
be a word-play here, and the second line of this fragment adds “whistling with winds
and  air-mingled  sounds”  (the  Greek  for  “whistling  is  “surizōn,”  cognate  with
“surinx”). Given Pan's connection with a wind instrument, and the sounds in the
mountain that cause his special kind of fear, it is possible that the author of this
fragment intended an allusion to Pan. Another fragment from the same poem lists a
number of gods and their domains, ending with the observation “all these things are
one” (Orphic fragment 413.12). The reference to Paian is a bit vague. Normally,

Paian is another name for Apollon (OH 34.1+n), but it is also attributed to Sun (OH
8.12), Dionysos (OH 52.11), and Apollon's son Asklepios (OH 67.1). But as Sun is
also called “fruit-bearing, Paian” (the Greek there is the same as in this hymn) and is
also a piper (OH 8.11+n), the immediate identification here is most likely that
between Sun and Pan. That leaves “light-bringing lord of the cosmos.” This could
describe Sun, but a better candidate is perhaps Protogonos, who is a “begetter of
blessed gods and mortal men” (OH 6.3) and also brings light to all (OH 6.8). It is
very interesting in connection with Protogonos that our composer in the next line
addresses him as Priapos, a rustic divinity similar to Pan (OH 6.9+n), and also that
when Zeus is called Pan in Orphic fragment 86, he has earlier been identified with
Protogonos, suggesting that all three were considered different names for the same
deity. As mentioned in the introduction to this hymn, Pan's presence seems to be
meant as a more concrete realization of the abstract entities addressed in the earlier
hymns and a transitional figure to more anthropomorphic ones.
: For the idea of the all-seeing eye of Sun, see OH 8.1+n.
19 your providence alters the natures of all: Interestingly enough, the lovers who
reject Pan often undergo transformation (see note to line 9). Compare, too, OH
10.21.
12. To Herakles
Herakles is the most storied of all the legendary Greek heroes. His popularity and the
sheer bulk of his adventures, probably the result of accretions over a long period of
time, have effaced the true origins of this figure (for his possible Eastern connections,
see Levy 1934). He is already mentioned a few times in the Iliad and Odyssey, and a
poem attributed to Hesiod, the Shield, focuses on his battle against the bandit Kyknos.
For a summary of Herakles' life, see Apollodoros 2.4.8–2.7.8. There is also a Homeric
hymn in his honor. In the tradition, we find this larger-than-life hero represented in
many different ways. He is the great slayer of the monsters in the wild, thus opening the
world for the expansion of civilization. He can be seen as a paragon of virtue, as in the
parable of the Sophist Prodikos, preserved by Xenophon, where the young Herakles
chooses the Hesiodic rough road of Virtue over the easy path of Vice (Xenophon
Memorabilia 2.21–34). For the Stoics, Herakles symbolized the endurance needed to
face adversity with equanimity and the ability to persevere and ultimately prevail.
The connection of Herakles with Dionysian cult is not easy to explain, but there are a
number  of  factors  that,  when  taken  together,  help  illuminate  his  position  in  our
collection. Herakles dies when he puts on a poisoned robe given to him by his jealous

wife Deianira, who had been tricked into thinking it was a love charm. After Herakles
builds his own pyre and immolates himself, he is translated to Olympos, where he
becomes a god and takes Hebe (meaning “youth”), a daughter of Zeus and Hera, as his
wife. In Homer, Odysseus encounters the shade of Herakles in the land of the dead,
although the divine part of Herakles is said to be a god on Olympos (Odyssey 11.601–
614). Herodotos reports that the Greeks worshipped Herakles both as a hero and as a
god (2.44), and Pindar calls Herakles a “hero-god” (Nemean Odes 3.23). The golden
apples of the Hesperides, which Herakles fetches in his eleventh labor, are sometimes
interpreted as symbols of immortality (as are the labors as a whole), and even Hebe
herself, the goddess of youth, might be understood to signify eternal life. This special
status of Herakles is connected with his leading a virtuous life, and this pattern of
achieving divine status after death, particularly tied to one's virtue or goodness, is one of
the concerns found in the Bacchic gold leaves (Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 94–136); see
also note to line . In fact, we find Herakles being initiated in mystery cults, such as
the Eleusinian Mysteries (Xenophon Hellenika 6.3.6; see also Boardman 1989, pl. 392).
Both he and Dionysos seem to have been worshipped together at Thasos, one of the
oldest cult centers for Herakles (see Larson 2007, pp. 185–186). A cup painting shows
the two of them together in a symposiastic setting, attended by satyrs (Boardman 1975,
pl. 376; cf. also Boardman 1989, pl. 131). Herakles is often depicted as wearing the
skin of the Nemean Lion, and Dionysos often wears the skin of an exotic animal
(leopard, panther) in his iconography. Both have Theban connections, both are sons of
Zeus by mortal women, and both are struck by their father's lightning bolt (Dionysos,
albeit indirectly, is struck while in Semele's womb; Herakles, in some versions, has his
pyre ignited by Zeus' lightning). Herakles also has fertility associations (see Levy 1934,
pp. 43–45).
Finally,  there  are  a  few  indirect  ways  Herakles  might  have  been  brought  into
connection with Orpheus. Both are numbered among the Argonauts, and both return
alive from a journey to the underworld. The legendary poet and musician Linos taught
music to Herakles, who eventually killed his teacher in a paroxysm of rage; Linos is
variously related to Orpheus in the tradition as brother, grandfather, teacher, or disciple.
Lastly, there is a connection with the Idaian Dactyls from Krete. These were famous
magicians and metalworkers who were also priests of mystery cults; in some cases, they
are  considered  the  teachers  of  Orpheus  (see  Graf/Johnston  2007,  pp.  170–172).
Pausanias calls one of the Dactyls Herakles (9.19.5, 9.27.8), adducing elsewhere as an
authority the legendary poet Onomakritos (8.31.3). Pausanias also says that the men of
Elis reported to him that this Herakles was the first to hold an athletic contest at
Olympia during the time when Kronos was the ruler of the cosmos (5.7.6–7), while
other authors make Herakles the founder of the Olympian Games. Indeed, his twelve
labors feature on the metopes of the temple of Zeus at Olympia (early- to mid-fifth

century). In this context it should be noted that Herodotos was already aware of a
multitude of Herakleis (2.43).
The curious fact that this hymn to Herakles immediately precedes the one to Kronos
is probably to be understood along these lines. Despite the nominal association with the
hero who was the son of Zeus, Herakles seems to have been conflated with an older
generation of divinities in Orphic mythology. In one Orphic theogony Herakles was
another name for Time (see note to line ). Our hymn, which calls Herakles a Titan
(line 1), seems also to associate him with Sun (see note to line 10). He is here an
anthropomorphized cosmic force, the last in a series that starts from an abstraction
(Physis)  and  continues  through  a  hybrid  creature  (Pan).  He  thus  bears  a  close
resemblance to the Herakles supposed to have been invoked by Pythagoras (alongside
Zeus and the Dioskouroi) as the “force of nature” in libations before a meal (Iamblichus
Life of Pythagoras 155).
1 mighty, powerful Titan: Kronos is similarly addressed in the following hymn (OH
13.2). It is possible that “child of the earth” in line 9 (also used of Kronos at OH
13.6) is meant to reinforce Herakles' connection with the Titans.
3  father  of  time:  In  the  Orphic  theogony  attributed  to  Hieronymos,  Herakles  is
sometimes another name for Time (Orphic  fragment 76 and 79; note, too, the
“primordial scales” in line 10, a characteristic of the Orphic Time). An obscure
arithmological  treatise  that  has  come  down  to  us  among  the  writings  of  the
Neoplatonist Iamblichus (mid-third / fourth century AD), The Theology of Arithmetic,
lists the significance of the numbers one through ten. For the “tetrad” (number four),
we find, “And again, they call the tetrad ‘Heracles' with regard to the same notion of
the year, as giving rise to duration, since eternity, time, critical time and passing time
are four, as moreover are year, month, night and day, and morning, midday, evening
and night” (translation by Waterfield 1988, p. 62). Sun is also called “father of time”
(OH 8.13), and there are other parallels connecting both figures, e.g., both are
addressed as Titan, both are “self-born” and “untiring” (OH 8.3), and both are
invoked by alternate forms of a name usually associated with Apollon (Paian and
Paion). In the Dionysiaca of Nonnus, a hymn to Sun begins “star-cloaked Herakles,
lord of fire, marshal of the universe” (40.369). At lines 11–12 in our hymn, dawn
and dusk are worn on Herakles' head, and the twelve labors are said to “stretch from
east to west,” the same path Sun takes on his daily journey. Sun is connected with
Herakles in myth as well, as the former lent the latter his cup, in which he rides on
the river Okeanos (which flows counterclockwise) during his return journey from
west to east (see Stesikhoros PMGF S17; Boardman 1975, pl. 300). Herakles had
gone west to retrieve the cattle of Geryon, and the suggestion of a cycle in Herakles'

wanderings (east-west-east) might have facilitated a connection with the sun's circuit
in antiquity. The twelve labors of Herakles could also be seen as representing the
twelve months of the year (see Morand 2001, p. 84). Thus in these two lines, the
idea of four time periods, as mentioned in the Theology  of  Arithemetic (“year,
month, night and day”), might be intended; see also OH O.18n.
5 all-conquering
: The Greek word is “pankrates.” This was the name of a god in
Athens who was represented as a mature, bearded man accompanied by a younger,
unbearded  man.  This  younger  man  is  sometimes  called  Pankrates  Herakles  in
dedications, and he bears the traditional Heraklean attributes of lion skin and club
(see Mikalson 1998, p. 144 n. 20).
5 archer and seer: Both of these are also attributes of Apollon; see note to line 10.
6:  This  line  is  noticeable  for  its  collocation  of  words  meaning  “all”  (including
“omnivorous”), which is “pan” in ancient Greek, and thus evocative of the preceding
hymn. For other cases where we find Pan and Herakles in proximity, see OH 11i and
the note to line 10 below.
10 Paion: An alternate name of Apollon (see OH 34.1n), also spelled “Paian,” it is used
of a number of other personalities in the collection, almost all of whom share
affinities with Herakles in this hymn. His association with Sun is discussed in the
note to line 3 above. Pan is called Paian in the previous hymn, which bears other
similarities with this one (see also note to line 6 above). Paian is also used of
Asklepios at OH 67.1, and elsewhere we find Herakles associated with this god as
well. Aristides (see OH 86i) relates a story told to him by a stranger, who claimed
that in a dream he had sung a hymn to Herakles composed by Aristides that began
“ie Paian Herakles Asklepios!” (Orations 40.12). It is therefore notable that Herakles
is asked to bring “all charms against disease” in line 14. In fact at Athens, he was
invoked to keep plagues away (Larson 2007, p. 185; see p. 220 n. 7 for references).
One of Herakles' adventures was the killing of the eagle that had been devouring
Prometheus' liver, and Hesiod metaphorically calls the eagle a “disease” (Theogony
523–534). Both Herakles and Asklepios are culture heroes, and this would naturally
facilitate a closer relation between them; see also OH 67i.
15 club in hand: This is one of the most common iconographic attributes of Herakles.
He also often wears the skin of the Nemean Lion like a cowl.
16: The last three labors of Herakles (cattle of Geryon, apples of the Hesperides,
Kerberos) are instances that fit the wide-spread mythological pattern of the hero
overcoming death. During his last labor, he sometimes is credited with freeing
Theseus from the underworld, where he had been trapped for his role in assisting

Peirithoös' attempt to abduct Persephone. Herakles actually wrestles Death (Greek
Thanatos) in order to win back the soul of the departed Alkestis (see Euripides' play
of the same name). Herakles as a liberator from death (the threat of death, the
mundane existence of the soul in the underworld) fits in well with the concerns of
the initiates in Dionysian mystery cults (and see the introduction to this hymn). The
“poisonous darts” refers to the arrows that Herakles dipped in the poisonous blood of
the slain Hydra.
13. To Kronos
Kronos is traditionally the youngest of the Titans, one of three broods born to Earth and
Sky. He is the one who castrates his father and consequently frees the other Titans who
had been blocked from exiting the womb of Earth. The other two fraternal groups, the
Hundred-Handers and the Kyklopes, he deigns not to liberate. Earth and Sky get their
revenge when they advise Kronos' wife Rhea on how to put an end to her husband's
ingestion of their children. This involves the trick of substituting a stone for the newly
born Zeus, who eventually overthrows his father. Kronos and most of the other Titans
attempt to overpower the upstart Zeus and his brethren in the long, pitched battle known
as the Titanomachy, but Zeus is able to prevail and imprisons the enemy Titans in
Tartaros, a particularly murky area in the underworld. For details, see Hesiod Theogony
132–210,  453–506,  and  617–731.  In  general,  Orphic  theogony  appears  to  have
appropriated many of these traditional elements, although in one account Zeus tricks
Kronos  by  getting  him  drunk  with  honey  (wine  having  not  yet  been  invented,
doubtlessly due to the fact that Dionysos had not yet been born) and castrating him in
turn (see Orphic fragment 220, 222, and 225; see also PGM 4.3100). Kronos, along with
the Titans, is also responsible for the brutal murder of Dionysos in Orphic lore, and it is
the destruction of the Titans by Zeus that leads to the birth of the human race (see note
to line 1 below).
While Kronos is cast in the role as adversary to the gods, there is an alternate,
positive strand in his mythology. In Hesiod's myth of the five races of man, the first and
best, the Golden race, enjoys a paradisiacal existence under Kronos' rule (Works and
Days 109–126). A similar kind of lifestyle is enjoyed by certain select members of
humanity after death in the Elysian Fields or on the Isle of the Blest. In Homer, it is
relatives of Zeus that qualify for such an honorific dispensation (e.g., Menelaos, as a
son-in-law of Zeus, at Odyssey 4.561–569). In Hesiod it is an unspecified number of
men of the Heroic race that are awarded a carefree life (one similar to that of the
Golden race) after death (Works and Days 166–173; compare the more agonistic Norse
notion of Valhalla). Pindar designates the Isle of the Blest as a place for “those who

have endured/three times in either realm/to keep their souls untainted/by any injustice”
(Olympian Odes 2.68–70, translation by Nisetich 1980) and explicitly says that these
souls will “travel/Zeus' road to the tower of Kronos,” (ibid., 70–71) located on the
islands where the dead bask in leisure (72–80). For the idea of “ethical selection” after
death  and  the  promise  of  blessings  in  the  afterlife  for  Orphic  initiates,  see
Graf/Johnston  2007,  pp.  100–105  and  115–116.  At  a  festival  called  the  Kronia,
celebrated in Athens and elsewhere in Greece, the slaves would join their masters at the
feast and, according to one source, were served by them (cf. the Roman Saturnalia).
The effacement of social class probably has its roots in the idea of a “golden age,” when
there was no need to toil on the land and hence no slavery (Burkert 1985, pp. 231–232).
Kronos shared a temple with Rhea and Earth at Athens (Pausanias 1.18.7).
Our hymn seems little concerned with the mythological Kronos, either in his positive
or negative aspects. He is addressed as an august ancient divinity, and in particular his
association with Time, an integral deity in the Orphic theogonies, is stressed (see note
on line ). In the previous hymn Herakles is identified with Time and is called a Titan
(lines 3 and 1, respectively, and see notes). This hymn neatly transitions to the all-
important Olympian gods through the illustrious pair of Kronos and Rhea, the parents
of Zeus (for similar pairings, see OH 14.8–9n).
1 father of blessed gods and men: As Time (see note to line 3), he is indeed the father
of gods and men, since he sired the primeval elements, Khaos, Erebos, and Ether.
This line, though, admits of other interpretations. The “blessed gods” could be a
specific  reference  to  the  Olympian  gods,  of  whom  Kronos,  either  directly  or
indirectly, may rightly be called the “father.” He also may be considered as father of
men in the sense that he is the most prominent of the Titans, out of whom man was
born in Orphic myth (see OH 37i), or to the extent that he might be identified with
Prometheus (see note to line 7), who very often is credited with the creation of man
(e.g., Aristophanes Birds 686, Plato Protagoras 320d; cf. the creation of Pandora by
Hephaistos, a god with some similarities to Prometheus, at Hesiod Works and Days
60–63 and 70–71; see also OH 66i). Note that in the spell “Oracle of Kronos” found
in the magical papyri, Kronos is credited with creating “the entire inhabited world”
(PGM 4.3099). See also “progenitor” in line 8. The birthing theme found in the
previous hymns continues. In the following hymn, Kronos' wife Rhea is called
“mother of gods/and of mortals” (OH 14.8–9).
3 you consume all things and replenish them: The identification of Kronos with
Time (Greek Khronos) is a later development, but one that was easily made. The
idea of consuming and replenishing perhaps hints at the swallowing and subsequent
regurgitation of his children and thus might have facilitated equating Kronos to

Time. Note, too, that his son Zeus swallows and then “recreates” the entire world in
the theogony found in the Rhapsodies (Orphic fragment 241). Kronos is the source of
our “Father Time,” whose sickle, incidentally, has its origins as the device used to
castrate Sky. Further references to Kronos as Time in our hymn can be found in
lines  and 7.
4: The “unbreakable chains” of Kronos are proverbial. Plato portrays them as being
inferior to the “bonds of virtue” by which Hades keeps the virtuous dead in his
kingdom (Cratylus 404a). In the magical papyri, they turn up in a binding spell
(PGM 4.2326) as an attribute of Moon, along with a scepter that has writing on it
authored by Kronos (PGM 4.2841), and in the spell called the Oracle of Kronos
(PGM 4.3086–3124).
6 child of Earth, child of starry Sky: A similar formulation is found in Hesiod
Theogony 106 for all the gods born of Earth and Sky. The Titans as a group are
called the “glorious children of Sky and Earth” in their hymn (OH 37.1). Many of
the Bacchic gold tablets instruct the initiate to claim that he or she is a child of Earth
and starry Sky and of a heavenly race; see OH 4i and compare the claim made by the
initiate to Persephone and the other underworld gods that he or she is from the same
race (see Graf/Johnston 2007, nos. 5, 6, and 7, as well their discussion on pp. 111–
114).
7 revered and prudent lord of Rhea: Rhea is both sister and wife to Kronos; see the
following hymn. The word translated as “prudent” is “promētheu,” which some have
translated  as  “Prometheus,”  thus  positing  an  equivalence  between  these  two
proverbially clever Titans. The craftiness and intelligence of Kronos is emphasized in
this hymn: he is “resourceful” (line 2), “of the shifting stories” (line 5), and “wily”
(line  9).  A  further  reason  why  these  two  figures  are  blended  might  be  their
involvement in the creation of man (see note to line 1).
14. To Rhea
Rhea is a Titan, daughter of Earth and Sky, and the sister of Kronos, whom she married
after  he  successfully  rebelled  against  Sky.  Her  place  in  mythology  was  essentially
limited to her importance as the mother of Zeus and in particular her role in the
succession myth between her son and husband/brother (see OH 13i). However, she
accrued more prominence when she was later identified with Kybele, the great Phrygian
mountain mother of the gods, who was also known as Mother (Greek Mētēr), and
Mother of the Gods. This is one of many equivalences that was made between a Greek
goddess of fertility and the Phrygian goddess. The lyric poet Melanippides (ca. mid-

fifth century BC) equated Demeter and Mother (PMG 764), while the lyric poet Telestes
(late fifth century BC) also added Rhea to the equation (PMG 809). Such identifications
apparently had already been made in early Orphic thought, for the author of the Derveni
papyrus quotes the following from a poem he attributes to Orpheus, “Earth, Meter,
Rhea, Hera, Demeter, Hestia, and Deio” (for this last name, see OH 40.1n), while also
giving some etymologizing explanations for the various appellations (Orphic fragment
398, and see Betegh 2004, pp. 189–190). In our collection, there is some overlap
between this hymn and the one addressed to the Mother of the Gods (OH 27); compare
also the ones to Earth (OH 26) and Eleusinian Demeter (OH 40). We find some
correspondences as well with the Homeric Hymn to the Mother of the Gods and, to a
lesser extent, the Homeric Hymn to Earth, Mother of All. In Orphic mythology, Zeus, in
the form of a snake, mates with his mother, Rhea, who had also changed herself into a
snake to escape the advances of her son, which leads to the birth of Persephone (Orphic
fragment 87). Here we find a blending of Demeter, Persephone's traditional mother, and
Rhea (see also OH 29i). The monstrous appearance of Persephone frightened Rhea so
much that she refused to offer her breast to the child (Orphic fragment 88), a motif also
found in the Homeric Hymn to Pan (see OH 11i). Rhea is the one who puts the pieces of
her grandson Dionysos back together after he is murdered by the Titans (for references
and further discussion, see Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 75–77).
The position of this hymn emphasizes Rhea's prestige as the wife of Kronos and the
mother of Zeus, her customary associations in Greek mythology. However, the content
of  the  hymn  itself  vacillates  between  stressing  this  side  of  the  goddess  and  her
identification with Kybele; see notes passim.
1 daughter of many-faced Protogonos
: This is true, insofar as Rhea is considered the
same as Earth, for in one version of the Orphic myth of creation, Protogonos and
Night give birth to Earth and Sky (Orphic fragment 149). Strictly speaking, though,
she is their granddaughter.
2 bull-slayers: This is a kenning for lions, animals typically associated with Kybele. See
further OH 27.2+n.
3  you  dance  to  the  sound  of  drums  and  cymbals,  O  frenzy-loving  maiden:
Percussive instruments are characteristic of the ecstatic elements of Kybele's cult;
see OH 27.11n. Euripides explicitly associates this with Rhea in the Bacchae. The
chorus of Bacchantes first sings of the dance of the Kouretes to the drums and auloi
as they protected the infant Zeus, which is presented as the invention of the custom.
Next, the chorus tells us, the drum was passed down to Rhea, from whom the
maddened satyrs stole it. Finally, it reached the hands of the Kouretes for use in
Dionysian ritual (120–134). The Phrygian drum of Rhea is mentioned earlier in the

play by the chorus (58–59). For the role of madness in this cult, see line 6 below and
OH 27.13n, which supplies further references to the theme of insanity that runs
throughout the Hymns. Rhea's connection to the ecstatic Kouretes and the Kretan
cave cult of Zeus probably facilitated her identification with the Phrygian goddess,
who was associated with a similar band of ecstatic youths, the Korybantes (see OH
27i and OH 31i). Wild dancing is also typical of maenadic worship; see OH 52i.
6 horrid shrieks of mortals: The conjunction of this phrase with “in the mountains”
probably means these shrieks are those of the worshippers of Dionysos, possessed by
the god and in a state of ecstasy. They can be “horrid,” because of the terrible things
that these raving adherents sometimes effect; an example is their tearing apart of
Pentheus, which Euripides grippingly portrays in the Bacchae. Likewise, this phrase
might refer to madness in general (see note to line 3). To be sure, ecstasy and
madness are concepts that the Greeks did not consider completely distinct from one
another, and we, too, need not be detained by a pedantic precision; see further OH
30i.
8 liar, savior, redeemer: Quandt has postulated that “liar” refers to Rhea's deception of
her husband at the birth of Zeus, and he draws attention to Pausanias, who describes
Kronos as being deceived by his sister-wife (9.41.6). She thus can also be considered
“savior” and “redeemer” of the child, just as she sometimes is of Dionysos in Orphic
mythology  (see  the  introduction  to  this  hymn).  There  may  also  be  an  oblique
reference to this tale in Apollodoros who says that after Dionysos had been driven
insane by Hera, he came to Mount Kybela in Phrygia where he was purified by Rhea
and taught initiatory rites (3.5.1; see also Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 146–147, and OH
27.13n). However, soteriological and redemptive powers turn up throughout the
collection  among  other  divinities,  often  near  the  close  of  the  hymn  when  the
addressee is enjoined to appear.
8–9 mother of gods / and of mortals: This is paralleled by Kronos being called “father
of blessed gods and men” (OH 13.1+n). Kybele is also expressly attributed as such
(OH 27.7); see also OH 26.1+n. There are other mother goddesses in the collection
(see OH 10.1n), as well as a number of explicit male/female pairings: Night/Sky (OH
3/4), Zeus/Hera (OH 15/16), Nereus/Nereids (OH 23/24), Persephone/Dionysos (OH
29/30),  Sabazios/Hipta  (OH  48/49),  Aphrodite/Adonis  (OH  55/56),
Asklepios/Hygeia (OH 67/68), Tyche/Daimon (OH 72/73), and Leukothea/Palaimon
(OH 74/75); see also OH 61i, OH 69i, and OH 76i.
9–10 earth, / ... sky ... sea ... winds: These lines elevate Rhea to the status of the
primeval womb of creation; compare the Homeric Hymn to Earth, Mother of All:
“Her beauty nurtures all creatures that walk upon the land,/and all that move in the

deep or fly in the air” (30.3–4). Insofar as the sky is connected with ether, and hence
fire, these four physical items are symbolic of the four elements that constitute the
physical world (see OH 11.2–3n). A similar range of natural features (albeit without
the symbolism of the four elements) appears in Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika
1.1098–1099, when the seer Mopsos advises Jason to propitiate Mother of the Gods,
“for on her the winds and sea and earth's foundations/all depend, and the snowy
bastion of Olympos” (translation by Green 1997). See also OH 27, addressed to the
same Mother of the Gods, the “queen of the sky” (line 4), to whom the earth belongs
(line 6) and who “hold[s] sway over the rivers and over all the sea” (line 8). In the
Epidaurian hymn to Mother of the Gods, she asks for half of heaven, earth, and sea,
apparently in recompense for the abduction of her daughter (19–24; see also OH
27i). For other mentions of the earth, sea, and sky in the collection, see OH 10.14–
16n. The mention of the winds last neatly transitions to the attributes “ethereal” and
“restless” in the next line.
15. To Zeus
Zeus is the chief deity of the Greek pantheon, and his role in myth and cult is as wide-
ranging as his power. A large portion of Hesiod's Theogony treats his ascendancy to
ruler of the universe. He is hidden away on Krete as a babe, frees his siblings who had
been swallowed by his father, Kronos, at birth, and then leads a successful rebellion
against him and most of his father's brethren, the Titans (see OH 13i). Hesiod then gives
a brief portrayal of his victory over a second threat, the monstrous Typhon (820–880;
see Apollodoros 1.6.3 for a fuller account). After dividing the universe among himself
and his brothers (see OH 17.7n), Zeus takes on a series of wives, who give birth to a
number  of  important  divinities  and  heroes  (886–926).  Of  his  countless  affairs  in
mythology, the two most significant ones to Orphism are his union with his mother
Rhea, which produces Persephone (this is specific to Orphism; see OH 14i and OH 29i),
and his relations with Semele, which produces Dionysos (see OH 44i).
In cult, Zeus was worshipped in diverse ways, from a personal, household deity that
brought  good  fortune  (cf.  line  11  below  and OH  19.20;  see  also OH  73i)  to  a
Panhellenic god who symbolized a common Greek culture (e.g., at Olympia and the
Olympian Games). As a weather god, he is often called on to bring life-nourishing rain
to the crops; he thus has fertility associations. In Iliad 14.346–351, when Zeus embraces
Hera before they make love on Mount Ida, the earth itself blossoms into a breath-taking
array of flowers and they draw a golden cloud around them that sheds dew; this scene
seems to be reminiscent of a very old myth of the union of Father Sky and Mother
Earth as the source of life itself (see also OH 4i). An inscription found at Palaikastro,

Krete, preserves a hymn that invokes him as the “greatest kouros [youth]” and prays that
he “leap into” the flocks, fields, and homes as a spur to growth (see also OH 31i). The
fertility aspect of Zeus may even endow this celestial god with a chthonic character (cf.
OH 7.9n), and he sometimes is depicted in the form of a snake. Note, too, that when
Zeus impregnates Rhea/Demeter, both are in the form of a snake. Another important
aspect of Zeus in Greek religion is his role in maintaining social institutions. He is one
of the gods who protects the sanctity of oaths (like Sun; see OH 8i). Both guest and host
are under his guardianship, as well as suppliants and beggars. In general, justice and
order, the underlying principles of human community, are his responsibility. This is
symbolized in myth, where Dike is his daughter and Themis his first wife (see OH 43i,
OH 62i, and OH 79i). For more on his role in Greek religion and cult, see Burkert 1985,
pp. 125–131, and Larson 2007, pp. 15–28.
It  is  interesting  that  in  this  hymn  there  is  scarcely  any  attention  paid  to  his
mythological exploits or his role in human affairs. He is above all presented as a cosmic
god, the creator of the universe and universal order, all-powerful and majestic. The
same is true of the other two hymns addressed to him as “Thunderbolt” and Astrapaios,
respectively  (OH  19  and OH  20).  His  placement  in  this  collection  serves  as  a
culmination of the cosmogonic arc that defines the previous fourteen hymns, all of
which are addressed to primeval beings. There is a gradual movement from abstractions
to concrete anthropomorphism (see OH 11i, OH 12i, and OH 13i); it is almost as if the
known universe is taking shape before the initiates' eyes. Once the divine pair of Zeus
and Hera is reached, the cosmogony proper has come to a close, and the theogony can
begin  (see  also  note  to  lines  –5).  This  is  further  reinforced  by  the  following
consideration. The direction of the arrangement of entities up until now has been
chronological, but only four of the original six Olympian gods are grouped together
here. The hymns to Demeter and Hestia should properly find their place among these.
But the dynamic, chronological movement has ended; instead the collection takes a
more static, horizontal approach, branching out as it were over the family tree of Zeus
(eventually focusing, of course, on Dionysos and Dionysian cult). Furthermore, the
constituent  elements  of  the  world—fire,  air,  water,  and  earth—are  singularly
emphasized in the hymns to Zeus, Hera, Poseidon, and Plouton, respectively. This
sequence is repeated by the following hymns, which adhere to the same order: fire (OH
19–20), air (OH 21), water (OH 22–25), and earth (OH 26–27). Demeter, who also is
associated with the element earth, is in a sense already present in OH 26–27 by dint of
her  identification  with  primeval  goddesses  (Rhea,  Kybele).  Furthermore,  her
prominence in the Eleusinian Mysteries makes her hymn more appropriate of the
central  group  that  treats  figures  of  Dionysian  cult  (OH  40–54).  The  domestic
associations of Hestia, who could be equated with the element fire, would not easily fit
the cosmological context (see further OH 84i). This “elemental” placement of hymns

also recurs toward the end of the collection (OH 79–84), albeit in a different order (see
OH 79i), and similar groupings are found in the opening address to Mousaios (see OH
O.3–5+n, and OH O.32–33). The order of hymns 15–18 and 19–27 is the same as in
the Stoic creation of the elements out of the primeval fire, attributed to Khrysippos,
following Zeno (Long and Sedley 1987, fragment 47A; cf. 46C).
There is a very short Homeric hymn addressed to Zeus where he is paired with
Themis. Kallimakhos and the Stoic philosopher Kleanthes each wrote a hymn to Zeus,
and Aratos opens his Phainomena with an invocation to Zeus as the one who set the
stars in the sky as signs for mankind (1–18).
–5: In the first instance, these lines are typical in the way the power of a god is
presented by describing his efficacy throughout the range of creation. Kleanthes uses
the same technique in his hymn to Zeus (15–16), and we also find it elsewhere in our
collection (see OH 10.14–16n and in particular OH 19.9–19). Nevertheless, there is
special point to its appearance here, for it is probably meant literally. In the Orphic
cosmogony found in the Rhapsodies, Zeus is said to have swallowed Protogonos and
with him the entire cosmos and then to have reconstituted them again in a second act
of creation; it seems that some version of this account was already present by the
Classical period, for the exegete in the Derveni papyrus (fourth century BC) alludes to
a similar, if not the same, story (see Orphic fragment 12, 14, 31, 237–243, West
1982, pp. 84–93, 218–220, 237–241, and Betegh 2004, pp. 111–122, 125–126,
169–181). Of particular note is the existence of a hymn to Zeus, found in the
Pseudo-Aristotle De mundo (401a25 = Orphic fragment 31) and the Rhapsodies
(Orphic fragment 243), which probably ultimately derive from whatever poem the
Derveni author is analyzing (see Orphic fragment 14). The one in the Rhapsodies, far
more extensive than the other two, actually matches physical features with Zeus'
body parts; compare the allegorical interpretation of “cosmic Pan” (see OH 11i) and
in Norse mythology the creation of the world out of the carcass of Ymir by Óðin,
Vili, and Vé. The act of swallowing is also reminiscent of Kronos' attempts to thwart
any potential threat from his children by swallowing them, and it should be recalled
that Zeus swallows Metis when he learns that she is fated to bear a son mightier than
he is (Hesiod Theogony 886–900). The motif is taken up in the Orphic story but
turned on its head. Zeus is not worried about losing his supremacy; rather he is
seeking to establish it (see also note to line 7).
6 scepter: Traditionally the symbol of a sovereign's power. The symbolism is also
employed in the Orphic succession stories (see OH 10.26n).
7 beginning and end of all: We find similar sentiments in all three Orphic hymns to
Zeus (see note to lines 3–5); compare also Aratos Phainomena 14. By swallowing

Protogonos and recreating the world, Zeus in effect becomes the oldest being.
Betegh argues that the strange second creation is meant, among other things, to
resolve a contradiction that was felt between Zeus' supreme power and the fact that
he is not among the oldest, but rather youngest generation of gods; by having Zeus
recreate the world, one and the same entity acquires both priority in age and power
(Betegh 2004, pp. 172–174). Our collection might also be attempting to come to
grips with the problem in another way. This hymn to Zeus appears in its proper
chronological sequence, but Zeus is the first god mentioned in Orpheus' address to
Mousaios (OH O.3, right before Earth). For the personified Beginning and End, see
OH O.41+n. The same phrase here is used of Sky in his hymn (see OH 4.2+n).
8–9: The reference to thunder and lightning, as well as the thunderbolt mentioned in line
6, anticipate OH 19 and OH 20. The role of Zeus as weather god and Zeus as fertility
god is suggested in these lines (“increaser,” “sower”). While purity is of great
concern  in  many  contexts,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  Zeus  was  sometimes
worshipped under the title Katharsios (Purifier); see OH 20i and also OH 30.4n.
10–11 health, / ... peace and riches: While such requests are made throughout the
collection, it is nevertheless perhaps significant that Eirene (Peace) is one of the
Seasons, daughters of Zeus and Themis (see OH 43i). Hygeia, health personified, is
the addressee of OH 68; she is sometimes invoked with Zeus over libations poured at
symposia (see OH 68i and OH 73i). The collocation of health, peace, and wealth
appear frequently in requests: see OH 14.12–13 (Rhea), OH 17.10 (Poseidon), OH
19.21 (Zeus the Thunderbolt), OH 23.8 (Nereus), OH 32.15–16 (Athene). Note that
fertility replaces wealth in OH 10.31 (Physis) and OH 36.14–15 (Artemis). In OH (Eleusinian Demeter), this type of request reaches a crescendo, combining health,
peace, wealth, and law, perhaps because of the hymn's prominence in the collection
(see OH 40i+18–20n).
16. To Hera
Hera is a daughter of Kronos and Rhea, and the sister-wife of Zeus; see, e.g., the
Homeric Hymn to Hera. She has fertility connections, as can be seen in Homer, who in
the Iliad portrays her and Zeus making love on top of a mountain, reminiscent of the
marriage between Father Sky and Mother Earth (see OH 15i). She is identified with a
number of earth-mother goddesses, along with Hestia, in an Orphic verse cited in the
Derveni papyrus (see OH 14i). As with Earth herself, Hera is able to produce children
parthenogenetically, such as Typhon (Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.326–352), whose
parents, according to Hesiod, are Earth and Tartaros (see OH 18.2n). Typhon becomes

the arch-enemy of Zeus, and this incident reflects one of the more pervasive themes in
mythology, namely, the constant bickering of Hera and Zeus. Occasionally Hera stands
up to Zeus directly; Homer, for example, briefly mentions her role with Athene and
Poseidon in their attempted coup of Zeus (Iliad 1.396–406). More often, however, Hera
unleashes her fury on Zeus' lovers and illegitimate children. She is particularly adamant
in pursuing Herakles. Dionysos and those around him do not escape her wrath, either.
By her machinations Semele is destroyed (see OH 44i), Ino suffers (see OH 74i), and
Dionysos himself, as Herakles and Io, is driven mad (see Euripides Kyklops 3, Plato
Laws 672b, and Apollodoros 3.5.1). In the Orphic myth of Dionysos' death, it is
sometimes Hera who spurs the Titans to kill the child (see OH 37i and Orphic fragment
304). While in the myth known as the “Return of Hephaistos” (see OH 66i) Dionysos
does appear to help Hera, nonetheless it is also possible that the reconciliation Dionysos
indirectly effected by leading Hephaistos back to Olympos also led to a grudging
reconciliation between him and his step-mother. Thus two outsiders would be integrated
into the divine order together.
Despite Hera's antipathy to Dionysos in myth, we do in fact sometimes find them
together in cult. Alkaios refers to a sanctuary dedicated to Zeus, Hera, and Dionysos on
Lesbos (fragment 129). At Olympia, where her temple predated the one to Zeus, there
was a chorus in honor of Physkoa, a local lover of Dionysos, performed at games held in
Hera's honor (Pausanias 5.16.1–8). In general, Hera's role in cult is largely one of
maintaining social order. She is usually worshipped as a civic goddess, one who protects
and maintains the well-being of the community, particularly in her capacity as the
goddess of marriage, one of the most important institutions in the ancient world. For
more information on her role in Greek religion, see Burkert 1985, pp. 131–135, and
Larson 2007, pp. 29–40. In this hymn, however, her traditional cultic roles are omitted
as is her mythological persona. Indeed, she is scarcely conceived as an anthropomorphic
goddess but instead closely identified with the air and life-bringing rains. Her fertility
associations are thus maintained without the usual concomitant chthonic character.
While Zeus is sometimes equated with air (see Betegh 2004, pp. 193–197), it is Hera
who more often is considered a manifestation of this element. Plato etymologically
relates her name and the word for air (Cratylus 404c), and the Stoics also make the
identification (see Long and Sedley 1987, fragment 54A, and OH 21i). It is possible that
such a connection was also attributed to Orpheus; see Orphic fragment 202(iv). As
already mentioned, Hera is sometimes claimed to be the mother of Typhon. This
creature is associated with destructive winds (Hesiod Theogony 869–880; see also OH
23.5–7n), and perhaps the version that makes Hera his mother was influenced by a play
on Hera/air as in Plato. This hymn thus fits in the sequence of gods that are correlated
with the four elements, and the hymn to the Clouds (OH 21) would be its analogue in
the  subsequent  group  that  replicates  this  pattern  (see OH  15i).  It  also  forms  a

male/female pair with the previous hymn, a common structural feature of the collection
(see OH 14.8–9n).
3 soft breezes you send ... nourish the soul
: The word for “soul” in Greek, “psukhē,”
also has the connotations of “life” in general, and this is probably its sense here as it
is at OH 38.22 of the Kouretes, who appear to be manifestations of the “soft
breezes” (see also OH 38.3+n). Furthermore, it is etymologically connected with the
verb “psukhō,” “I blow,” and our composer, who elsewhere displays an ear for such
wordplay, likely intends one here as well.
4 mother of rains, mother of the winds: For the connection of rain and wind, see OH
21i.
4  you  give  birth  to  all: The epithet used here is also given to Hera by Alkaios
(fragment 129).
17. To Poseidon
Poseidon is a son of the Titans Kronos and Rhea, and a brother of Zeus and Hades. He
is the god of the sea, and sometimes the sea itself, as in the Lesser Krater, attributed to
Orpheus (Orphic fragment 413.7). As our hymn explains, the sea fell to him by lot when
the world was divided (line 7 and see note), and all bodies of water fall under his
control. Nevertheless, he does infringe a bit on Zeus' power over the storms, and we
often find him stirring them up in mythology (e.g., Odyssey 5.282–296). Also like Zeus,
Poseidon is a father of heroes, Theseus being the most famous example. In some
variants Poseidon is even the father of Persephone, mating with Demeter in the form of
a horse (see OH 69i), which also produces the wonder horse Areion. This points to
another important sphere of Poseidon, that of horses (see, e.g., Iliad 23.306–308,
Sophokles Oedipus at Kolonos 712–715, and Aristophanes Knights 551–558). A famous
equine offspring of his is Pegasos, born to Medousa after she is beheaded by Perseus
(Hesiod Theogony 278–281). Another important function of Poseidon is his role in
causing earthquakes; his common epithet “shaker of the earth” appears in line 4. He was
also imagined to hold or embrace the earth, as another common epithet of his, “holder
of the earth,” attests (see line 1). Both epithets are juxtaposed as a playful oxymoron by
Hesiod (Theogony 15), and we find each one used in cult. Poseidon was an important
deity in bronze-age Pylos (Nestor's father, Neleus, is his son), and of course he was
especially worshipped by those communities whose livelihood depended on the sea,
such as Korinth. One tradition reported by Pausanias claimed that Poseidon was the god
of Delphi along with Earth until he switched places with Apollon, taking this god's old
site at Kalaurea (2.33.2, 10.5.6). This is an island off Troizen, where Poseidon was an

important divinity, and it was also the birthplace of Theseus. Poseidon contended with
Athene for this island, but Zeus awarded it to both of them (Pausanias 2.30.6). They
also fought over Athens, but here Athene was victorious; the myth is depicted on the
west pediment of the Parthenon. A strange ritual to Poseidon as god of horses is
portrayed in the Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.230–238. For more details on his cults,
see Burkert 1985, pp. 136–139, and Larson 2007, pp. 57–68. Orphism seems to have
adopted the traditional view of this god. Indeed, this hymn is wholly composed of
conventional items. It represents the element of water, and it is the third of a series of
hymns that links some of the Olympian divinities sprung from Kronos and Rhea with
the  four  elements  (see OH  15i). OH  22–25,  dedicated  to  maritime  divinities,  are
analogously placed.
: This line is almost identical to the one in the Homeric Hymn to Poseidon, except that
instead of “hearken” the Homeric hymn reads “hail” (22.6). The opening address to
Mousaios also refers to Poseidon as the “dark-maned holder of the earth” (OH O.5).
3: For one view of how the Greeks imagined his abode, see the languorous dreamscape
of Poseidon's palace depicted by Bacchylides (17.97–129); see also OH 24.2–3+n.
5–6: Poseidon's driving his chariot on the sea is a literary trope as old as Homer (Iliad
13.23–31).
7: After Zeus becomes king, he divides the world among himself and his two other
brothers. They draw lots: Hades wins the underworld, Poseidon the seas, and Zeus
the sky (see Iliad 15.185–195, Hesiod Theogony 881–885, and Apollodoros 1.2.1).
This was adopted into Orphic mythology as well (Orphic fragment 236). A very
similar line appears in line 6 of the following hymn; cf. also OH 15i.
9–10: As the “shaker of the earth” (line 4), Poseidon naturally has the power both to
cause and prevent earthquakes. Likewise, as the god of the sea he is able to wreck
ships or save them (see Hesiod Works and Days 665–668, where he shares this
power with Zeus). The Kouretes also hold the power to hinder or help sailors (OH
38.5,  14–17,  23–25),  the  latter  function  easing  their  identification  with  the
Dioskouroi, who are traditionally worshipped as saviors of sailors (see OH 38.21+i).
Other  gods,  too,  are  invoked  in  this  capacity  as  well:  Tethys  (OH  22.9–10),
Leukothea (OH 74.4–9) and Leukothea's son Palaimon (OH 75.5–8).
18. To Plouton
Plouton is another name for Hades. His name is connected with “ploutos” (“wealth”),
although Ploutos also is the name of a separate divinity (see OH 40.16n), one of the

many  personified  divine  abstractions  found  in  Greek  religious  thought.  Originally
Plouton was a separate god, but he merged with Hades sometime before the fourth
century BC and their names became more or less interchangeable. This early merging is
probably at the root of the god's dual function as both lord of the dead (Hades) and as
provider of the fruits of the earth, including mineral wealth (Plouton). While at first
blush it might seem odd for a god to be so intimately connected with both life and
death, it should be kept in mind that many divinities hold power over binary opposites.
Persephone, too, is a goddess of life and death; see OH 29+i, especially lines –16, and
OH 30i. Crops and other vegetation come out from below the earth and thus could be
interpreted as being caused by Hades and Persephone. There are very few myths
associated with Hades-Plouton. The most prominent one is his abduction of Persephone,
which is mentioned in lines 12–15 (see OH 41i). This story is part of the foundation
myth of the Eleusinian Mysteries (see OH 40i). When Hades receives cult attention, it is
almost always in his capacity as a fertility god, and he is usually worshipped alongside
his wife Persephone, also called Kore (a word that means “maiden” in Greek). Hades is
the son of Kronos and Rhea, and thus brother to Zeus and Poseidon. The placement of
this hymn completes the genealogical pattern of Zeus-Poseidon-Hades. Further, with
the strong association of Plouton with earth, it also ends the series of the four elements
that was initiated with the hymn to Zeus; see OH 15i. The analogous hymns are OH 26–
27, and note that OH 29 is a hymn addressed to Persephone.
2 meadow in Tartaros: While the “psukhai” (“spirits, souls”) of the dead are portrayed
as  wandering  on  asphodel  meadows  (e.g., Odyssey  11.539),  Tartaros  is  usually
envisioned as a distinct place, where the Titans and Typhon, after being defeated by
Zeus, are imprisoned (Hesiod Theogony 717–733 and 868; see also OH 37.3+n). It is
in effect the Alcatraz of mythology. Tartaros was originally a vaguely personified
primordial being with whom Earth mated to produce Typhon (Hesiod Theogony and 820–822; see also OH 16i). Sacred meadows also appear in the Bacchic gold
tablets as part of the special dispensation the initiate receives after death (nos. 3, 27;
see also OH 29i and OH 87.12n). Orphic fragment 340 distinguishes the “beautiful
meadow” by the river Acheron (see note to line 10), whither those who did good
deeds while alive go after they die, from Tartaros, whither the malefactors go by way
of Kokytos (see also OH 71.2n). Another meadow that has chthonic connections is
the one where Persephone was picking flowers before being abducted by Hades; it is
mentioned in line 13.
3 Chthonic Zeus: A common periphrasis for Hades, who is rarely mentioned by name
(see also OH O.12+n). The expression does not imply that Zeus and Plouton are the
same person, but rather that Plouton is lord of his own element, the depths of the
earth, and by extension of the whole earth (see line 6 and note). Similarly, Poseidon

is called “sea-dwelling Zeus” at OH 63.15. Hades is also known as Aidoneus, as well
as by a number of epithets that essentially function as titles (such as the list given in
lines 11–12). This scruple reflects ancient belief that calling a divinity by name
might draw their attention to the one invoking them, and Hades, in his capacity as
the lord of death, is a god one normally wishes to avoid as long as possible (cf. OH
87.11–12). Our initiates must nevertheless propitiate him, as he would have the
power to keep them from a blessed afterlife (compare lines 17–18).
4 holder of the keys to the whole earth: Hades' portrayal as one who holds the keys to
the underworld can represent his power to keep the dead locked up and his ability to
prevent them from returning to the land of the living (Pausanias 5.20.3). In this case,
however, the keys are more likely intended to be symbolic of the god's power to give
or withhold the wealth of the earth, as is made clear by the employment of the name
Plouton in this context; see also OH 25.1 and OH 29.4.
6 yours is the third portion: See OH 17.7n.
9 of windless, and of impassive Hades: Just as it is in the use of the word “Tartaros”
at line 2 (and see note), a blurring between person and place is seen in the usage of
the word “Hades,” which designates both the god and the realm he rules (see also
line 15). Hades is often described by adjectives and phrases that indicate the lack of
something: other typical examples include “tearless” and “without laughter.” The
underworld is often seen as the inverse of the land of the living. Comparable is
Odysseus' sojourn to the land of the dead in book 11 of the Odyssey. The psukhai
cannot speak, until they drink blood, considered by the early Greeks to be one of the
vital forces that make life possible (another one being air; see also OH 66.9+n).
There is also an inversion of social custom here. Normally a host provides for the
strangers who come to their door, but in this situation Odysseus, although a visitor,
must  provide  for  his  hosts—and  not  the  hosts  themselves  at  that,  but  their
subordinates.
10 Acheron: The “river of woe,” it is sometimes specially designated as the one which
the psukhai must cross to reach Hades proper; see also note to line 2.
12 Euboulos: The name means “of good counsel” and is another form of the name
Eubouleus; see OH 41.8n.
12–15: The beginning part of the abduction of Persephone. “Attic cave” and “Eleusis”
are clearly intended to evoke the Eleusinian Mysteries, the most famous mystery cult
in antiquity and the one with the most participants (see OH 40i).
16 you alone were born to judge: Usually the judges of the dead are prestigious
heroes.  The  most  important  ones  are  Minos,  king  of  Krete,  his  brother

Rhadamanthys, and Aiakos, all sons of Zeus (see, e.g., Plato Gorgias 523a–524a).
Sokrates at his trial even adds Triptolemos, one of the Eleusinian heroes (Plato
Apology 41a), a detail perhaps embellished to play to the sympathy of his judges, of
whom some were doubtlessly initiates in the Eleusinian Mysteries. Of course, Hades
and Persephone are often depicted as exercising their executive prerogatives, as
numerous figures in mythology appeal to them to allow them return to the land of
the living, such as Orpheus himself, when he requested to bring back Eurydike (see
also OH 87.9n).
19. To Zeus the Thunderbolt
The display of light and sound during a powerful thunderstorm is an awesome sight to
behold, even to the modern mind, which of course knows there are rationally grounded
scientific principles that explain the meteorological phenomena it perceives. How much
more it must have captured the imagination of the ancients when the previously serene
skies suddenly and inexplicably exploded in a violent eruption of elemental fury! It is no
wonder that a god who wields the thunderbolt would hold a prominent place in any
pantheon, and for the Greeks this is in the hands of the chief deity Zeus. In myth,
thunder and lightning are supplied to him by his uncles, the Kyklopes, of whom there
are  three:  Brontes  (Thunderer),  Steropes  (Flash),  and  Arges  (Brightness).  These
Kyklopes gave the thunderbolt to Zeus out of gratitude for his releasing them from the
underworld (Hesiod Theogony 139–146, 501–506; Apollodoros 1.1.2 and 1.2.1; Orphic
fragment 228). They are usually portrayed as smiths (e.g., Orphic fragment 269, where
they are the teachers of Hephaistos and Athene) and so ought to be distinguished from
the unsophisticated rustic race of Kyklopes that Odysseus encounters on his journeys.
Zeus uses his great power to defeat the enemies of order and civilization; see, e.g., the
similar depictions of his might in the Titanomachy and the defeat of Typhon in Hesiod
Theogony 687–710 and 839–868. The lightning bolt of Zeus also makes short work of
mortals who transgress boundaries and commit hubris, such as Asklepios, the son of
Apollon, who effaced the line between life and death by resurrecting men from the dead
(see OH 67i). The weapon sometimes kills unwillingly: in the story of Dionysos' birth,
Semele is destroyed by the thunderbolt of a reluctant Zeus bound by an oath (see OH
44i). We find this story adopted into Orphic mythology, which further relates that the
Titans are again kerblasted by the lightning of Zeus, this time for their murder of
Dionysos  (see OH  37i).  In  cult,  Zeus  is  worshipped,  as  he  is  addressed  here,  as
Keraunios (Thunderbolt) and also Kataibates (Descender); in fact, both had an altar at
Olympia (Pausanias 5.14.7, 10). Those who died by lightning strike were often accorded
special honors after death (see OH 20i).

Our  hymn  focuses  on  the  physical  manifestation  of  the  thunderbolt  itself  in  a
surprisingly vivid and extended description that fills almost the entire hymn. Like a
painter, the poet guides our eye from the appearance of the bolt in the sky, through its
dizzying descent, and down to its epiphany on the surface world. It thus encompasses
the same collocation of realms as found in other hymns in the collection (see OH 10.14–
16n and in particular OH 15.3–5+n) and thus accentuates the cosmological significance
of Zeus' power. Another similarity to OH 15 is that the element fire is emphasized, as it
is in the companion hymn that follows. This hymn begins a series that is arranged on the
same principle of the four elements that defined the order of OH 15–19 (see OH 15i).
Kleanthes also praises the power of Zeus' thunderbolt, stressing that it is the tool Zeus
employs  to  steer  the  world  with  reason  (Hymn  to  Zeus  9–13);  compare  also  the
statement that “thunderbolt directs everything,” attributed to Herakleitos (Kirk, Raven,
and Schofield 1983, no. 220).
16–17:  Possibly  a  vague  reference  to  the  birth  of  Protogonos  as  reported  by  the
Rhapsodies, where the egg out of which he is born is also called a “cloud” and a
“bright robe” (Orphic fragment 121; see also OH 21i).
20. To Astrapaios Zeus
This hymn forms a pair with the previous one to Zeus the Thunderbolt. It is shorter, but
they have a number of similarities: stress on fire, atmospheric description, and detail of
sound. “Astrapaios” means “of lightning,” and, strictly speaking, refers to the gleam of
light that accompanies the thunderbolt. The Greeks sharply distinguished between the
sound of thunder, the flash of lightning, and the physical bolt itself (see West 1971, p.
207), and so it is perhaps surprising there is no hymn for Zeus of the Thunder included
in  this  sequence.  Thunder,  however,  is  personified  and  mentioned  in  the  opening
address to Mousaios (see OH O.38+n), and as a physical phenomenon thunder appears
in this hymn and the previous one, as well as the first one dedicated to Zeus, either
explicitly or implicitly (see OH 15.9; OH 19.6, 9, 14–15; cf. OH 20.3). OH 19 and OH
20 essentially refer to the same aspect of Zeus, although they do not fully overlap. Zeus
as cosmic begetter appears in this hymn (line 5; cf. OH 15.3–5). He is not invoked to
bring a myriad of blessings, as in the previous hymn (OH 19.20–23), but rather to give
the initiate a “sweet end to... life.” It is interesting to note that, while there are a number
of hymns in the collection that ask in one way or another for a noble end of life, the only
ones where the addressee is asked to bring a sweet one is here and in OH 73 to Daimon,
who is probably being identified with Zeus (see OH 73i; cf. also OH 86.12). It may have
particular point here since there was special religious significance attached to death by

lightning. In fact, some of the Bacchic gold tablets seem to refer to being killed by Zeus'
lightning; see nos. 5, 6, 7, and Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 125–127. Their suggestion—
that the initiates are expressing hope of being purified in death and enjoying the same
special status in the underworld as the heroes—may be at work in this hymn as well (see
further OH 87.12n). The idea, of course, is not that the initiates wish to be struck by
lightning but that their efforts in following the cult would effectively purify their psukhē
in preparation for death. Fire often has importance as a purifying agent in Greek
religion, and it is significant that Zeus is addressed as “pure” in the opening line of this
hymn (see also OH 15.8+8–9n). The “sweetness” of the end of life might then be
proleptic.
21. To the Clouds
This hymn corresponds to the hymn to Hera; see OH 16i. This goddess has a connection
with  clouds  in  mythology,  which  might  have  strengthened  the  association  in  our
composer's eyes. When the mortal Ixion makes advances on Hera, Zeus creates a cloud
doppelganger of his wife, with whom Ixion then has relations. He is punished in the
underworld for this outrage, tied to a flaming wheel that endlessly spins throughout
eternity. The cloud, though, becomes pregnant and gives birth to the centaurs (see
Apollodoros, epit. 1.20). In this hymn, the Clouds are represented, in a similar way
Hera is portrayed in hers, purely as meteorological phenomena that produce rain and are
the loci for thunder and lightning. There were a number of explanations for these
manifestations of weather in antiquity. Anaximander speculated that they occur when
wind  breaks  through  a  cloud  (Kirk,  Raven,  and  Schofield  1983,  nos.  129–131);
Anaximenes added that clouds themselves are formed when the air is condensed and
that further condensations eventually squeeze out rain (Kirk, Raven, and Schofield
1983, no. 158). Herakleitos contended that thunder comes from the crashing of winds
and clouds, lightning from the kindling of the clouds, and rain from their quenching
(Diels  and  Kranz  1951–52,  22A14),  while  Anaxagoras  attributed  thunder  to  the
collision of clouds, and lightning to their friction (Diogenes Laertius 2.9). The Sokrates
in Aristophanes' Clouds explains thunder and rain as the result of clouds, filled with
water, colliding and lightning as the result of a dry wind, caught inside a cloud and
breaking forth (367–411). These details have probably been cobbled together from Pre-
Socratic theories by Aristophanes, if not outright invented, to set up a number of
scatological and political jokes. The founder of Stoicism, Zeno, appears to have been
unsure whether lightning, thunder, and the thunderbolt itself were the result of the
friction  or  the  striking  of  the  clouds  occasioned  by  the  wind  (SVF  1.117).  The
explanation in our hymn seems closest to Aristophanes', and there are a number of

verbal reminiscences of his work that suggest direct influence; compare also Sokrates'
“Hymn to the Clouds” at 263–274 of that play. That the Clouds are already “filled with
blazing thunder” perhaps alludes to the relationship between Zeus, who is identified
with the thunderbolt in OH 19, and his wife Hera. The Stoics, when allegorizing Zeus as
fire and Hera as air, note that the fire is the superior, active principle, with air being
subject to it and passive (see SVF 2.1066, 1070, 1075). The Clouds in this hymn do
seem quite passive, even impregnated; that they are invoked to send rain at the end (6–
7) is not necessarily a contradiction, since this is a conventional formulation. It is
repeated verbatim at the end of OH 82 (see also OH 82.4n). For the belief that the
clouds were born from the sea, see OH 22.8n. In the Orphic Rhapsodies, the egg out of
which Protogonos is born is called a “cloud” as well as a “bright robe” (Orphic fragment
121; see also OH 19.16–17n and West 1983, p. 202).
22. To the Sea
Sea is here identified with the Titaness Tethys, the wife of Okeanos. For their role in
traditional and Orphic cosmogony, see OH 83i. That she and her husband might have
had a more important role in certain Orphic accounts of creation might explain why our
composer has opted to identify the sea with her, as opposed to another primeval watery
figure such as Pontos. The male/female pattern we see employed as a way to group
hymns elsewhere in the collection is not used here (but note that Tethys and Okeanos
appear  together  at OH  O.26–27).  Perhaps  the  reason  is  to  be  found  in  Okeanos'
association with death; see OH 83i. Their daughters, the Okeanids, are identified with
the Nymphs to whom OH 51 is addressed (and also see line ).
This hymn, along with the next three, form a group that is associated with water and
is the third in the series that repeats the pattern of elements found in OH 15–18 (see OH
15i). It is also interesting to note that this hymn follows the one to the Clouds just as the
hymn to Okeanos follows three separate ones to the winds, which receive prominent
notice here and in the previous hymn. For the connection between sea, air, and clouds,
see note to line 7.
2 dark-veiled: The same epithet is used of Tethys at OH O.26.
7 mother of Kypris: Kypris is another name for Aphrodite, who in one version is born
out of the sea; see OH 3.2n and OH 55i.
7 mother of dark clouds: The idea that the clouds and winds are “born” from the sea
goes back to the Pre-Socratics. Xenophanes mentions this explicitly (Kirk, Raven,
and Schofield 1983, no. 183), and it seems implicit in Anaximander (Kirk, Raven,

and Schofield 1983, no. 129). Aristophanes is probably alluding to this doctrine
when he makes Okeanos the father of the Clouds (Clouds 271 and 277); see also OH
82.4n. For the weather phenomena produced by clouds, see OH 21i.
8 mother of every spring round which nymphs swarm
: Aside from creation myths
where Okeanos and Tethys are considered the first (or first progenitors) of all, they
are credited with being the parents of smaller bodies of water. Hesiod lists some of
the three-thousand rivers (male) and three-thousand springs (female) that are their
brood (Theogony 337–370). Like other personified water divinities, their human
form may be loosely considered separate from the actual physical body of water. In
the theogony sung by Orpheus at Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika 1.495–512, the
Okeanid Eurynome becomes the consort to Ophion, and this pair of gods precedes
Kronos and Rhea as the rulers of Olympos (see also OH 83i).
9–10: A common request of sea divinities in our collection; see OH 17.9–10n.
23. To Nereus
According to Hesiod, Nereus is the oldest child of Pontos, a male personification of the
sea and a child of Earth (Theogony 233–236). Hesiod describes this divinity as being
particularly honest, gentle, and mindful of lawful things. His main importance in myth,
other than being the father of the Nereids (see following hymn) is his identification with
“the Old Man of the Sea” (e.g., at Pausanias 3.21.9), a role he shares with other figures,
particularly Proteus (see OH 25i). He plays no role elsewhere in Orphic cult, and his
inclusion here seems to be entirely because of his daughters, with whom he forms
another male/female pairing (see OH 14.8–9n).
5–7: Like his son-in-law Poseidon, Nereus is connected with earthquakes. “Demeter's
sacred throne” is a kenning for the earth. The theme of winds continues from the
previous two hymns. Here they are locked up under the earth, and it seems that their
violent motion thus constrained is imagined to be the cause of earthquakes. This
might be intended as an interesting twist to the story of the bag of winds that Aiolos,
warden of the winds, gives to Odysseus (Odyssey 10.1–75). All of the winds are
contained in the bag except for the gentle west wind Zephyros (see OH 81+3–4n)
that conveys Odysseus' ship home. However his men, not knowing the bag's contents,
but thinking that Odysseus was hiding something good from them, foolishly open the
bag, thus letting all the violent winds out (similarly, Pandora; see Wolkow 2007).
These promptly blow the ship back to Aiolos, who refuses further assistance to the
beleaguered  Odysseus.  Comparable,  too,  is  the  imprisonment  of  Typhon  in
Apollodoros'  version  of  his  battle  with  Zeus  (1.6.3).  This  creature  has  wind

associations and, although imprisoned below Mount Etna by Zeus, is the source of its
volcanic activity; see also OH 16i and cf. OH 32.12n.
–8: The same requests are made of Poseidon at the end of OH 17, who also is
additionally petitioned to keep ships safe.
24. To the Nereids
The traditional genealogy, retained in this hymn, makes the Nereids daughters of Nereus
(which is what their name literally means) and the Okeanid Doris. There are usually
fifty of them. Hesiod gives a complete list of their names (Theogony 240–264), while
Homer only manages thirty-four, including Thetis (Iliad 18.39–49), the mother of
Akhilleus, who, along with Amphitrite, wife of Poseidon, are the most famous ones.
One anonymous poem, however, calls them the daughters of Amphitrite (PMG 939.10–
11).  Their  worship  was  wide-spread  and  localized  (Pausanias  2.1.8),  and  Sappho
invokes them along with Aphrodite to bring her brother back home safe (fragment 5).
Thetis is found with her own cults separate from the group (see Burkert 1985, p. 172).
Their importance in folk religion is attested by the modern Greek “Neráides,” the
generic appellation for all female nature spirits, who take their name from them. This
hymn continues the theme of water.
2–3: Bacchylides 17.100–108 paints a similar scene; see also OH 17.3n and cf. OH
75.1–2+1n.
3: The Tritons are a mythological race of mermen, the chief figure of whom is the
eponymous Triton, mentioned in line 5.
9–11: “mother Kalliope” is probably meant to evoke the fiction of Orpheus dictating
these hymns to Mousaios; see also OH 76.7n+i. Apollon's presence might similarly
be  explained,  since  he  is  sometimes  considered  the  father  of  Orpheus  (Orphic
fragment 895–898; with Kalliope as mother, 896). The connection of the Nereids
with the rites of Dionysos is curious. The Nereid Thetis succors Dionysos when he is
chased by Lykourgos (Iliad 6.130–137), but this probably says more about Thetis as
a helpful goddess (she also rescues Hephaistos, as related at Iliad 18.394–405) than
about any particular connection with Dionysian cult. Ino, who nursed her nephew
Dionysos and later became the sea goddess Leukothea (see OH 74i), is said to dwell
among the Nereids by Pindar (Olympian Odes 2.28–30 and Pythian Odes 11.2). The
Nereids are very similar to the Okeanids, who are identified with the nymphs who
nurse  Dionysos  in OH  51.1.  Furthermore,  the  two  groups,  both  of  which  are
composed of a plurality of young female water divinities, are sometimes confused,

despite the Nereids' connection with salty water and the Okeanids' with fresh. A
further source of confusion is that the Nereids are cousins to the Okeanids, since
their mother, Doris, is a daughter of Okeanos, and thus they are half-Okeanid
themselves! Interestingly enough, the Hellenistic poet Simias makes the nymphs the
daughters of Doris (fragment 13; he probably has the Nereids in mind). As in the
case of Sun, Pan, and Apollon, our composer has partially blended three originally
separate entities, for which some precedents were found in the earlier tradition. The
Nereids' connection with Dionysian cult is explicitly made in line , where they are
said to “revel in the waves.” This carries the connotations of maenadic frenzy (see
OH 1.3+n and OH 52i), and note that the Okeanids are similarly portrayed at OH
51.15–16.
25. To Proteus
Like Nereus, Proteus is an “Old Man of the Sea” (see OH 23i) and in fact may very well
just be another name for Nereus. In this hymn, however, he takes on a more cosmic
significance. Our composer plays on the folk etymology of his name (“the first”) in lines
2  and  9;  Proteus  is  raised  to  the  level  of  a  primeval  being.  The  same  “cosmic
etymologizing” from a name also appears in the hymn to Pan (see OH 11i), and Proteus
is described as having power over a similar range of realms as Pan (see note to line below). Our hymn also connects the shape-shifting abilities of Proteus (see note to lines
4–8) with his new primeval origin. He is able to change his form because he contains all
forms in himself (line 9), even as he himself is the one who has apparently created these
forms out of undifferentiated matter (lines 2–3). Proteus is thus cast in the role of a
demiurgic figure. This is not as strange as it might first appear, since water in both myth
and philosophical speculation is often regarded as the origin of the universe, or at least a
very early feature of it; see OH 83i. Water, being an element that is easily observed to
possess no firm structure, is an obvious choice for those seeking a single origin for the
concrete pluralities in the empirical world; its character is probably also a reason why
mythological beings connected with water are often shape-shifters themselves (see note
to lines 4–8). This hymn ends the series of ones addressed to water divinities.
1 key-holding master of the sea: For the symbolism of holding keys, see OH 18.4n.
2–3: The epithet “first-born” is quite similar to the name Protogonos, a very important
deity in Orphism, who has a central role in the creation of the world (see OH 6i).
Physis is also said to be “first-born” (OH 10.5). The word used here for “matter,”
“hulē,” is a philosophical technical term. Quandt in his edition of the Orphic Hymns
cites Stoic doctrine that called matter “mutable, changeable, and in flux” (SVF

2.305).
–8: Both Proteus and Nereus are able to change their shape. They are also considered
very wise and capable of prophecy, which for the Greeks comprised not just the
ability to see the future but also to know of the past and to interpret the present, as
lines 4–5 delineate. Shape-shifting and prophecy combine in the one important myth
of  Proteus  (Odyssey  4.348–570).  When  Menelaos  is  returning  from  Troy,  he
becomes stuck on Pharos, an island off Egypt, due to an act of impiety. A daughter
of Proteus, Eidothea, takes pity on the men and instructs Menelaos on how to get the
information he needs from her father. He and three companions kill seals from
Proteus' herd, cover themselves with the skins, and wait for Proteus to take his
noonday siesta. Then they jump on him and do not let go, even as he changes his
shape into various creatures and elements, until he returns to his original form. After
being released, Proteus truthfully explains to them what they must do to appease the
gods. He also answers Menelaos' questions about the whereabouts of Lokrian Aias,
Agamemnon, and Odysseus. Finally, Proteus reveals to Menelaos that he will not go
to the underworld when he dies but rather to the Elysian Fields. Vergil models his
account  of  Aristaeus  and  his  bees  on  this  story.  After  his  bees  suddenly  die,
Aristaeus' mother directs him to wrestle Proteus in order to find out why, and he
learns that it is due to the anger of Orpheus at Aristaeus' role in the death of
Eurydike (Georgics 4.387–527). Nereus is also involved in wrestling and prophecy.
During Herakles' quest for the Apples of the Hesperides, he first needs to secure
information from Nereus vital to his success; they wrestle and Herakles must keep
hold of Nereus as he constantly alters his form until the old man yields and gives up
the information (see Apollodoros 2.5.11). Of course, the ability to transform is not
always connected with prophecy. Peleus must hold onto the Nereid Thetis, who
keeps changing her shape, until she agrees to marry him (see Apollodoros 3.13.5),
and Herakles again wrestles a shape-shifting god, this time the river Achelous, for
the hand of Deianira (Ovid Metamorphoses 9.1–88).
9: For Physis, see OH 10i. She is said to preside over the heaven, earth, and sea in her
hymn (see OH 10.14–16+n).
26. To Earth
Earth (Greek Gaia or Gē), is the quasi-personified figure of the productive powers of
the land, the land itself, and often of procreation in general. She is, to an extent, a
generic  mother  goddess,  and  thus  shares  many  affinities  with  her  more  particular
incarnations, such as Rhea (OH 14), Mother of the Gods (OH 27), and Eleusinian

Demeter (OH 40), as well as with certain closely related male fertility gods, such as the
Kouretes (OH 31 and OH 38). For her identification with other fertility goddesses in
Orphic mythology, see OH 14i. She plays a central role in Hesiod's cosmogony and
theogony. Born after Khaos, she parthenogenetically gives birth to a number of similarly
quasi-personifications of physical features: Sky, Pontos (“sea,” but a different word than
the one personified as the addressee of OH 22), and the mountains. She then mates with
Sky in the usual way to produce the Kyklopes, the Hundred-Handers, and the Titans
(Theogony 116–118; 126–153). In the succession myths that follow, she connives with
her youngest son, Kronos, to put an end to the oppressive behavior of her son-husband
(154–175) and, in turn, now with Sky, helps Rhea end Kronos' swallowing of their
children (453–500). However, she helps her grandson Zeus avoid the danger of being
overcome by his progeny with Metis; instead, Metis is swallowed by Zeus, and Athene is
later born from his head (886–900; 924–926). See further the note to line  below.
Earth herself received worship in Greek religious practice; for details, see Larson 2007,
pp. 157–158. We also find her connected with the pre-Apollo Delphic oracle (see OH
79.3–6n).
This hymn is the first in the last group of a series (OH 19–27) arranged by physical
element,  here  earth,  which  mirrors  the  same  order  in  the  hymns  to  Zeus,  Hera,
Poseidon, and Plouton-Hades (OH 15–18); see OH 15i.
1 mother of men and of the blessed gods: Compare Homeric Hymn to the Mother of
the Gods 14.1 and Homeric Hymn to Earth, Mother of All 30.1, 17; see also OH
10.1+n, OH 14.8–9+n, and OH 27.7+n. Earth, like Physis, is portrayed more as a
natural force than a personified entity, and there are close affinities between their
hymns in the collection.
2 you bring all to fruition, you destroy all: Life and death, although opposites, were
nevertheless conceived as intricately bound polarities, and, as usual in Greek mythic
thought,  having  power  over  one  often  implies  having  power  over  its  contrary.
Persephone also holds the power of life and death in her hymn (OH 29.15–16+n; see
also OH 30i). A similar sentiment is found in the Homeric Hymn to Earth, Mother of
All: “... you are the source of fair children and goodly fruit,/and on you it depends to
give life to, or take it away from,/mortal men” (30.5–7). Perhaps comparable is a
certain ambiguity of Earth in myth, as, for example, found in Hesiod's Theogony.
The blood that falls from the castrated Sky fecundates Earth, who produces the
brutal Giants and the horrid Erinyes but also the lovely Ash Tree Nymphs (183–
187). Also, after the defeat of the Titans, Earth mates with Tartaros to produce the
scourge of the gods, the monstrous Typhon; yet it was Earth who suggested to the
gods that Zeus be made ruler after the defeat of the Titans (820–838; 881–885).

4 seat of the immortal cosmos: Hesiod calls Earth “the firm seat of all/the immortals
who hold the peaks of snowy Olympos” (Theogony 117–118); compare also OH
18.6–7. See further OH 27.9n.
6  deep-bosomed:  Compare  Hesiod Theogony  117,  where  Earth  is  called  “broad-
breasted.” This epithet is used twice of the sea in the collection: OH 17.3 and OH
74.3.
27. To the Mother of the Gods
The Mother of the Gods is the Phrygian goddess Kybele. She was also simply known as
Meter (Mother). Her worship wound its way from the Greeks in Asia Minor to the
mainland and appears to have gained traction in the sixth century BC. She is an earth
fertility goddess, and so quickly became identified with other such figures in Greek
mythology and religion: Rhea, Demeter, Earth, Hera—even Aphrodite and Hestia (see
OH 14i and the note to line 9 below). Likewise, Hipta, a goddess of Asia Minor, might
be a local version of Mother; see OH 49i. Wild music and dancing, ecstatic possession
and ritual madness, and the close connection of her worship with mountains were all
characteristic of the cult; see notes to lines 11 and 13. While her worship made some
headway into official Greek cult, it was for the most part relegated to marginal members
of society. Her wandering beggar-priests, called “mētragurtai” (“collectors for Mother”)
and “kubēboi,” were held in low regard. In terms of myth, insofar as Kybele is identified
with Demeter, she is the mother of Persephone and, just like Demeter in the Homeric
Hymn to Demeter, she keeps away from the gods in anger over her daughter's abduction;
see Euripides Helen 1301–1368. The story may have been the subject of the Epidaurian
hymn to Mother of the Gods (translation with brief discussion in Furley 1995, pp. 43–
45). In later antiquity, Agdistis, a doublet for Mother, takes on a younger consort, Attis,
whom in her jealousy she drives to such heights of madness that he castrates himself
(Pausanias 7.17.10–12). There seems to be no reference to him in this hymn, although
the name does appear in Orpheus' address to Mousaios (OH O.39). Kybele is connected
with the Korybantes, an ecstatic band of warriors who are associated with the Kouretes
(see OH O.20, OH 31.5+n and OH 38.20), hence connecting Kybele with Rhea (see OH
14.3n) and also, in our collection, Athene (see OH 32i). The power of the goddess'
madness reaches its gory peak in the self-castration of particularly dedicated male
worshippers, known as Galloi, for whom the myth of Attis serves as an etiology. Among
the works attributed to Orpheus are Enthronements of the Mother (Orphic fragment
602–605; cf. line 5 and note to line 9) and Korybantic Rite (Orphic fragment 610–611),
for which see West 1983, p. 27. For more on the cult of Kybele, see Burkert 1985, pp.
177–179, Larson 2007, pp. 170–171, and the detailed monographs of Vermaseren and Borgeaud 2004. This hymn should be compared to the hymn to Rhea in this
collection (OH 14) and the Homeric Hymn  to  the  Mother  of  the  Gods. It naturally
follows the previous one addressed to Earth, and it ends the second sequence of hymns
arranged by their association with the four elements; see OH 15i.
2  swift  chariot  drawn  by  bull-slaying  lions
: A typical attribute of the goddess,
mentioned at OH 14.2 as well. Bull-slaying lions also appear at Sophokles Philoktetes
400–401, where the goddess is called Earth. The Homeric Hymn to the Mother of the
Gods 14.4 associates both wolves and lions with the goddess. See also OH 36i.
7 of you were born gods and men: See OH 26.1n.
8 you hold sway over the rivers and over all the sea: Kybele is also the “queen of the
sky” (line 4) and the earth belongs to her as well (line 6), a natural association for a
fertility goddess. For the motif of the geographical extent of a divinity's power, see
OH 14.9–10+n. In particular, she shares such broad authority with Pan (OH 11.2–3),
a god connected to her through his ability to bestow madness (for this, see OH 11i).
In the next line, Kybele is identified with Hestia, who is associated with fire (OH
84.4n); perhaps, then, the related theme of the four elements is also relevant here
(see OH 10.14–16n).
9 Hestia ... giver of prosperity: Kybele's throne is described as being located in the
center of the cosmos (line 5), thus corresponding to the central position of the hearth
in the home; see OH 84i+2n and cf. OH 40.15+n. Compare also the previous hymn
where Earth is the “seat of the immortal cosmos” (OH 26.4) around which “the
intricate realm of the stars/revolves in endless and awesome flow” (OH 26.8–9). This
is reflecting a geocentric, not a heliocentric or pyrocentric, view of the cosmos; see
OH 4.3n and Burkert 1972, p. 317. Euripides in a lost play equated the Earth with
Hestia (fragment 944). As with Kybele in this hymn, so too is Hestia called on at the
end of her hymn to grant prosperity.
11 whom the drum delights: Drums and other percussive instruments such as cymbals,
clappers, and castanets are frequently found in the iconography of Kybele and
Dionysos (see further OH 30.1n). Along with the aulos, they play an important role
in the wild, frenzy-inducing music that constitutes their rites (see also note to line below). These instruments are mentioned in the Homeric Hymn to the Mother of the
Gods 14.3. See also OH 4.4+n. Music and madness is a recurring theme in our
collection:  see OH  11i, OH  14.3+n,  and OH  31.3+n.  It  is  particularly  tied  to
maenadism;  see  further OH  52.7–8n.  In  a  fragment  from  a  dithyramb,  Pindar
imagines ecstatic worship of Dionysos celebrated by the gods: Kybele leads off with
the beating of drums amid castanets, torches, and the wild shrieks of Naiads (water

nymphs); Ares is present, and Athene, too, with the hissing of the countless serpents
on her shield; finally Artemis arrives, having yoked lions, as a Bacchant (fragment
70b.6–21). This shows that already by the early fifth century, Dionysos and Kybele
were closely related.
12 all-taming savior of Phrygia, consort of Kronos
: In this line the identities of
Kybele and Rhea are fused. For “savior,” see OH 14.8n.
13 frenzy-loving: The goddess raves and is able to send madness to those she chooses.
The rituals of Kybele and the Korybantes (possibly separate from Kybele's) were
supposed to cure madness, and Dionysos himself had that power; see OH 71.11n.
Hera, who is sometimes identified with Kybele, has the ability to send madness as
well. She drives Herakles insane so that he kills his first wife, Megara, and even
more pertinently she employs madness to disrupt the lives of those who help the
infant Dionysos (e.g., Ino; see OH 74i) and, in some accounts, she drives Dionysos
himself to madness (see OH 14.8n).
28. To Hermes
Hermes is a god with a wide range of functions, which nevertheless boil down to one
essential idea: the ability to negotiate boundaries and bridge gaps. Many modes of travel
are available to him, including the ability to fly through the air as well as to skim along
the surface of the oceans (as beautifully portrayed at Odyssey 5.43–54). He can be a
guide to men, directing their travels and even overcoming obstacles that block their
path. Thus, for example he is able to bring Priam unharmed through the camp of the
Greeks to meet with Akhilleus (Iliad 24.322–467). He is even able to traverse that most
awesome divide between life and death; it is Hermes who leads the souls of the dead to
the underworld. His ability to journey anywhere makes him an ideal messenger, a role
he often undertakes in myth on the behalf of Zeus. Naturally, he is the god of heralds
and diplomats. An important skill for these professions is that of speaking well, and thus
he is also a god of language. Sometimes, though, a herald might find himself in
circumstances where it is preferable to smooth over a difficult situation with words, even
if the truth might have to suffer a bit. Hermes knows how to deceive with words.
Indeed, Hermes knows how to deceive, period; he is a trickster figure of the first order,
much like Prometheus and the Norse Loki. He is a god of thieves, but likewise he is the
god of merchants who can protect against thieves. As so often, a god is responsible for
the positive and the negative in a specific domain (see OH 30i). Like other trickster
figures, Hermes is also a culture hero, inventing things that do much to further the
civilized  life.  The  longer  Homeric Hymn  to  Hermes  (no.  4)  is  full  of  the  god's

innovations: the lyre, fire sticks, sacrifice, and wondrous shoes that hide his tracks. The
introduction of fire and sacrifice is also attributed to Prometheus, who steals fire from
the heavens and whose deception of Zeus at Mekone becomes the paradigm for future
human sacrifice (Hesiod Theogony 535–570 and Works and Days 49–53; see also OH
40.8–9n). The Homeric hymn, marked by its cleverness and wit, is itself a piece worthy
of Hermes himself. It seamlessly and playfully integrates in its narrative many of the
gods' prerogatives. His role as a god of minor divination is explained as one of Apollon's
gifts to him: Hermes does not receive a share of Delphic honors, but he is permitted to
learn about prophecy from the strange bee women who live nearby and who taught
Apollon as a child (4.533–566). He also is allowed to keep some of the cows he stole
from Apollon, becoming a god of cowherds (4.567–568). This, too, is a mythological
etiology that touches on a broader reality. Hermes is the god of all those who look after
any herd of animals, such as sheep and goats. Fertility associations are not foreign to
this god, who is able to increase the flocks of those he favors (see OH 1i). When the
basis of wealth changed from agricultural to commercial, Hermes remained the god who
brought profit. He is also the lucky god, and a piece of good luck was called a
“hermaion,” literally “a thing of Hermes.” The god is often found in pastoral settings,
frolicking with nymphs and other creatures of the wild. Yet he is also a god of physical
exercise and athletics, particularly of the gymnasia and wrestling grounds, both very
“urban” institutions.
Worship of Hermes tended to be domestic and personal; for details, see Burkert
1985, pp. 156–159, and Larson 2007, pp. 144–150. He seems to have had only a small
role in Orphism, at least as far as can be deduced from the little said about him in our
extant sources. His role as guide of the dead, which one would figure to be of particular
interest in Orphic cults, is highlighted in our collection by a separate hymn to Chthonic
Hermes, who seems to have become a separate entity (see OH 57i). Our hymn here,
though, is quite traditional in the various attributes it lists, although it is not by any
means  comprehensive.  There  is  a  particular  emphasis  on  Hermes  as  the  god  of
language.  This  is  understandable  in  a  body  of  work  whose  main  interest  lies  in
convincing deities through the use of language to be favorable and propitious. It is
notable that the rustic side of the god does not appear at all; this may be taken as
circumstantial evidence that the cult for which the Orphic Hymns were composed was
purely an urban one.
The placement of this hymn is curious at first blush. OH 15–27 are structured along
the lines of the four elements, and the following hymn to Persephone would seem also
to belong to this pattern, in as much as she is associated with earth (cf. OH 29.4, 6, 17).
We might then expect this hymn to stress the chthonic side to Hermes, which it clearly
does not do, despite his being called “lord of the deceased” in line ; instead, the hymn
to Chthonic Hermes has that function. However, as already mentioned, Hermes is a

figure who negotiates transitions, and it seems this hymn performs the same duty. It
serves as a dramatic pause, setting off the next two hymns to Persephone and Dionysos,
who of course are divinities of the utmost importance for the initiates. Their hymns
begin the central portion of the collection, focusing on the birth of Dionysos and
Dionysian cult.
1 son of Maia: The traditional genealogy of Hermes makes him the son of Zeus and
Maia, a daughter of Atlas; for details see both of the Homeric Hymns to Hermes (no.
4.1–19 and no. 18). Chthonic Hermes in our collection has a completely different
parentage (see OH 57.3–5+n).
2 judge of contests: This epithet appears in Greek literature applied to Hermes, the
earliest witnesses being a fragment of Simonides (PMG 555) and Pindar Pythian
Odes 2.10. The original context of the Simonides fragment is unknown, but the
Pindar citation comes from a victory ode celebrating the victor's winning of a chariot
race. The “contests” in our hymn may only be limited to athletic contests, something
that is within the domain of Hermes, or refer to any contest in general, given that
Hermes is also a god of good fortune. If there were contests involved in the ritual
during which our hymns were sung, then the epithet might have a more immediate
significance, especially if these contests involved some kind of speech (see OH 7.12–
13n; for athletic contests as a metaphor, see OH 87.12n).
3 Argeiphontes: This epithet of Hermes has been understood as “slayer of Argos” in
antiquity and in modern times, referring to Hermes' exploit in freeing Io from this
multi-eyed giant who guarded her. However, this interpretation has been questioned
and  “slayer  of  dogs”  has  been  offered  as  another  possibility.  For  a  technical
discussion, see West 1978, pp. 368–369. Both explanations portray Hermes in his
guise as the god of thieves, who often need to dispatch guards, whether watchmen or
watchdogs.
6 interpreter of all: The word “interpreter” in Greek is “hermēneus,” and there is an
intentional play on the name Hermes (also in Orphic fragment 413.1). The word and
name do not appear to be etymologically related, however. See also Plato Cratylus
407e–408b (and note the pun on Hermogenes' name!).
8 lord of Korykos: Korykos is the southern promontory of the Erythraian peninsula in
Kilikia. The mountain most frequently connected with Hermes is the one where he
was born, Kyllene in Arkadia. That he is the “lord of Korykos” and not “lord of
Kyllene” in this hymn may be due to the location of the cult in Asia Minor, where
Korykos would have been more familiar than Kyllene (and thus possibly would have
been a place of more emotional attachment for the initiates).

10: The ancient Greeks certainly realized that speech could be used for good or ill. The
ambiguity  can  be  seen  in  the  portrayal  of  Odysseus,  the  skillful  speaker  par
excellence. His gift with language saves him from the Kyklops Polyphemos. But
there are also failures, such as his unsuccessful embassies to the Trojans and to
Akhilleus, and the speech that wins him the arms of Akhilleus in turn leads to the
death of the great warrior Aias. More to the point, it is Hermes who endows
Pandora, that bane for mankind, with language, which allows her to wheedle and lie
(Hesiod Works and Days 77–82).
29. Hymn to Persephone
Persephone was called Phersephone and P(h)ersephoneia by the poets, Pherrephatta by
the Athenians, and Proserpina by the Romans. However, she is often merely known as
Kore (“maid”). She is the daughter of Zeus and Demeter already in Hesiod (Theogony
912–914). Orphism adopts this genealogy but also at times equated Demeter with Rhea,
the mother of Zeus (see OH 27i); she flees the advances of her son by turning herself
into a snake, but he does so as well and eventually mates with her (see also OH 40i). The
story repeats itself in the case of Persephone. She, too, is pursued by Zeus who again
takes the form of a snake (Clement of Alexandria Protrepticus 2.16.1). Their offspring is
Dionysos, and this might have produced Melinoe as well (see OH 71i). The most
important myth involving Persephone is her abduction by Hades, the most famous
version of which is found in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter; for a summary, see OH 41i.
There was at least one Orphic version as well. She is usually closely associated with her
mother in cult, in which fertility and other aspects of a woman's life receive emphasis,
particularly marriage. For an overview of important cults, see Larson 2007, pp. 69–85.
Her connection with the underworld and Dionysos is particularly important to Orphism.
She frequently appears on the Bacchic gold tablets. A few short ones merely convey
greetings to her (nos. 15, 17, 31, 37). In others the initiate appeals to her for their
reward in the afterlife for which their initiation into the cult had prepared them, and
there is sometimes an allusion to the initiate's guilt inherited from his Titan forbears
who killed Dionysos, Persephone's son (nos. 5–7, 9, 26a, b; cf. no. 8). In one tablet, the
initiate is assured to reach the “holy meadows and groves of Persephone” (no. 3). For an
analysis of these tablets, see Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 66–164; see also OH 18.2n and
OH 87.12n. We also find the chthonic connection of Persephone stressed in the magical
papyri through her thorough identification with other goddesses. There she is identified
with Moon, Hekate, and Artemis (see further OH 1i and OH 59.3–4n). In our hymn
both sides of Persephone are addressed. She is a fertility goddess, due to her connection
both to Demeter and Hades, who, although the lord of the dead, nevertheless has a

connection with life in that he can be seen as the one who sends up crops and other
growing  things  from  his  realm  under  the  earth  (see OH  18i).  His  abduction  of
Persephone  and  her  reunification  with  Demeter,  and  the  consequent  compromise
between the two over her, was interpreted by the Greeks as symbolizing the cycle of
growth: the seed is sown under the earth, where it lies dormant throughout the winter
until its fruit miraculously reappears in the spring (but see Burkert 1985, p. 160, for
another interpretation). Yet, through her marriage to Hades, Persephone is the queen of
the dead. Their relationship had a rough beginning, and she can even have a sinister side.
Odysseus fears that she might send up a ghost or monster to vex him during his visit to
the land of the dead (Odyssey 11.633–635); see also OH 71.4–5+n. It is perhaps for this
reason that the poet has omitted the more unsavory details of her birth and abduction
(as in the case of her mother in OH 40). This hymn together with the following one to
Dionysos forms a mother-son pair; for other similar collocations, see OH 14.8–9n.
1 sole offspring
: As in Orphic fragment 294. Demeter also bears this epithet; see OH
40.16+n. It is used of Hekate in Hesiod Theogony 426, a goddess who sometimes is
identified with Persephone. This might be one of the reasons why the source of
Apollodoros made Styx, and not Demeter, the mother of Persephone (Apollodoros
1.3.1).
4 the gates of Hades: Compare OH 18.4, where Plouton is said to hold the keys to
Hades.
5 Praxidike: The name means “exacter of justice.” Pausanias tells us that a group of
goddesses  called  Praxidikai  were  worshipped  at  Haliartos  (9.33.3).  The Orphic
Argnonautika  mentions  the  “mysteries  of  Praxidike”  (31)  without  further
elaboration.
6 mother of the Erinyes: In Orphic myth, the Erinyes are the children of Persephone
and Hades (sometimes Apollon); see OH 70.2–3n. Once in the magical papyri it
seems that Persephone is the name of one of the Erinyes; see OH 69.1n. In our
collection, she is also implied to be the mother of Adonis (see OH 56.8–9+n) and
Melinoe, although the allusion to the story of the latter's birth is obscure (see OH
71.4–5+n).
7–8: Eubouleus (“good counsel”) is a name applied to different divinities (see OH
41.8n), but here it refers to Dionysos. The epithet “loud roaring” is characteristic of
the god. In the next hymn, he is also described as “loud roaring” (OH 30.1+n), and
he  was  often  called  Bromios  (Roarer),  as  in OH  40.10.  Our  composer  here
euphemistically summarizes the doublet of Persephone and Dionysos' birth in Orphic
myth, as he does in the following hymn. No mention is made of snakes or rape.

9–11 radiant and luminous... brilliant and horned: When Demeter gives birth to
Persephone, the infant has an extra pair of eyes on her forehead and horns, and the
mother flees in terror at the sight (see OH 14i). This line might be alluding to an
identification with Moon, who is often portrayed as bright and horned (OH 9.1–2).
As mentioned in the introduction to this hymn, Persephone was identified with the
moon goddess, and in later antiquity the phases of the moon were associated with
her split existence between the land of the living and the land of the dead (see
Richardson 1974, p. 285).
9 playmate of the Seasons: In their hymn, the Seasons are described as playmates of
Persephone (OH 43.7+i).
12–14: The poet subtly glides between Persephone as a person and Persephone as the
fruits of the earth itself; the same effect is used with Dionysos and the grape (see OH
50.5+n). In the Orphic version of Persephone's abduction, she is weaving a robe of
flowers when Hades appears (Orphic fragment 288). The pointed contrast between
spring and autumn is mirrored in the life-death imagery in lines 15–16.
15–16: As is often the case, a god has control over opposites. Many fertility goddesses
double as death goddesses; see OH 26.2+n. The Greek in line 16  contains  an
etymologizing  play  on  words:  “Phersephonē pherbeis  ...  kai  ... phoneueis”
(“Persephone, you nourish ... and ... kill”). Hekate is called the “all-nourisher” in
the magical papyri (PGM 4.2749) shortly after she is addressed as Persephone
(4.2747). The Stoic philosopher Kleanthes is reported to have made a similar play on
words:  he  equated Phersephonē  with  warm  air  (“pneuma”)  that  is  carried
(“pheromenon”) through crops and is killed (“phoneumenon”).
19 a splendid old age to him who is sailing: This refers to the crossing of a river on
Charon's ferry in the underworld in order to reach Hades proper. For interpretation
of “old age,” see OH 87.12n.
30. To Dionysos
Dionysos is a very difficult divinity to define—and one suspects that this is exactly how
he would want it to be. He is a god of vegetation, particularly of the creeping vine (see
lines 4–5). He is a god of liquid fertility: the catalyst that initiates the process of growth,
the vital force that sustains it, and the fluid nourishment that flows from it. Semen,
blood, water, wine, honey, milk—Dionysos is all of this. His very essence is a fluidity
that is at once defined and undefined. At his roots, he is a god of transitions, but in
order for there to be a transition, there must be a point A and a point B between which a

transition exists. Dionysos swings between these extremes. At any moment, the god can
move from one to the next. He is a god of opposites: peaceful and warlike, human and
animal, sober and drunk, alive and dead, sacred and profane. Dionysos blurs the lines.
There are many Greek gods who oversee conflicting spheres, such as Apollon, the god
of medicine and disease. Yet none are so thoroughly defined by the juxtaposition of
opposites as Dionysos. The Hymns themselves teem with paradox and contradiction.
Even more, they seem to embrace it, to actively present the conflict wherever possible.
This frequently occurs at the verbal level and expands to include the addressed divinities
themselves. Identities are spliced (e.g., the Erinyes and Eumenides); entities are merged
(e.g., Okeanids and the Nymphs). The Dionysian spirit lurks behind this, too. A crucial
element of his worship is the process which the Greeks called enthousiasmos, “the god
inside”  (whence  English  “enthusiasm”),  the  belief  that  the  god  enters  into  the
worshippers and possesses them (see further OH 50i), which leads to a state of ekstasis,
“a standing out (of oneself)” (whence English “ecstasy”). To a degree unmatched by
other  divinities,  Dionysos  is  with  his  followers  (cf. OH  32i).  The  effacing  of  the
distinction between divine and human, the strange encounter where someone at the
same  time  is  somehow  both  himself  and  not  himself,  coheres  perfectly  with  the
transitional nature of the god himself. In the Hymns, religious experience becomes
poetic strategy. The various hymns are not merely words to be mechanically recited. It
is in their performance that they find their ultimate fulfillment. Through this (and the
other ritual acts), the Dionysian spirit was evoked, made manifest, and entered into the
very  breath  of  the  initiates—an enthousiasmos  of  language  that  transported  the
worshippers, however briefly, beyond their quotidian existence and allowed them to
touch the divine. This is the key to understanding the whole collection (see also the
introduction to the translation). In one respect, then, performing the Hymns enables one,
in essence, to become the god (see also OH 33i and OH 52i). The initiation ritual
mirrors Dionysos: as the god is ripped apart by the Titans and is born again, so, too, the
initiates, blasted by the vagaries of life, are reborn through initiation into something
pure and holy. And just as the pieces of the murdered divine child must be gathered and
reconstituted anew, so the initiates, in performing the Hymns where the details of cultic
myth and eschatology are scattered in obscure allusions but subtly linked through a
complex web of shared and similar epithets and descriptions, reconstitute the esoteric
knowledge that leads to a revelation of the secrets of life and death. The learned
contests we find mentioned sporadically in the collection might be understood in this
light; see OH 7.12–13n. Yet encounter with the divine is fraught with peril. The frenetic
invocations of various deities to appear, coupled with the uncertainty as to how they will
react to being so summoned, lead to anxieties. Thus the initiates repeatedly call on
figures to come kindly disposed and a few times even explicitly request the more
dangerous ones to dispel the madness they bring (see OH 71.11n).

This hymn is the first of many that address Dionysos. Coming as it does after the
hymn to Persephone, who is (one of) his mother(s) (see note to line 2 below), it
functions in a sense as the birth of Dionysos, and in many ways it culminates the series
of divinities addressed in the previous hymns. His birth is the moment the entire
universe has been anticipating. This initial hymn is followed by figures who play a role
in the god's early years (see OH 32i). Starting with OH 40, the collection moves away
from cosmology and mythology to a decided emphasis on cultic practice. This reaches
its  climax  through  a  number  of  hymns  dedicated  to  different  cultic  identities  of
Dionysos (OH 45–47 and OH 50–53), particularly as the divine child, and ends with a
hymn dedicated to the traditional thiasos of the god (OH 54). Various Dionysian themes
are interwoven in this grouping; imagery and concepts merge and blur the identities of
the addressees. These hymns occupy the central portion of the collection and most likely
the ritual itself.
For more on Dionyos' role in myth and religion, see Burkert 1985, pp. 161–167, and
Larson  2007,  pp.  126–143;  for  Dionysos  and  Orphism,  see  Graf/Johnston  2007,
passim. There are three Homeric hymns dedicated to this god (nos. 1, 7, 26).
1 loud roaring, reveling: Dionysian worship, particularly the ecstatic elements, was
marked by noise: voices raised in song, the clatter of percussive elements (see also
OH 27.11n), the sounds of the victim. The epithet used here is closely related to
Bromios (Roarer), another name for Dionysos; see OH 40.10+n. Compare “howling”
in line 4, and see further OH 29.8, OH 45.4, OH 48.3, and OH 49.3. The “Bacchic
cries” of the Erinyes are similarly described (OH 69.2) as well as the crashing of the
rain clouds (OH 21.3). For a description of the (maenadic) revel, see OH 52i.
2 primeval, two-natured, thrice-born: A numerical sequence. The word translated
here as “primeval” is “prōtogonos,” also used of Dionysos at OH 52.6. It is one of the
names of the pivotal Orphic divinity responsible for the creation of the world. The
two gods share many features and indeed can be considered the same being (or
different manifestations thereof); see OH 6i and note to lines 3–4 below. “Two-
natured”  probably  refers  to  Dionysos'  androgyny,  a  characteristic  shared  with
Protogonos and other divinities in the collection (see OH 6.1+n and OH 9.4n). It is
interesting to note that Apollodoros says that Zeus instructed Ino to raise Dionysos as
a girl (3.4.3), and that Mise seems to be interpreted as Dionysos in his feminine
manifestation (see OH 42i). Another possibility is that “two-natured” reflects the
andromorphic and teratomorphic side of the god, but this is probably what “two-
shaped” in the following line is meant to indicate. See also OH 52.5+n, where the
god is said to have a “three-fold” nature. The epithet “thrice-born” also contains
some ambiguity. In traditional mythology, Dionysos was born from Semele and from

Zeus, insofar as Zeus saved the child after the death of Semele and kept him in his
thigh until the child fully gestated (see OH 44i; cf. OH 45.1 and OH 50.3+n).
Orphism presented an alternate birth, one where Zeus mated with Persephone in the
form of a snake, as briefly mentioned below in lines –7 (see also OH 29i+7–8n).
Also, in Orphic mythology Dionysos is eventually torn apart and killed by the Titans
(see OH 37i); he is then either reconstituted (by Rhea, Demeter, Apollon, or Zeus;
see Orphic fragment 59, 322, 325–326) or born again through Semele (see OH 44i).
Some authors who refer to a “thrice-born” Dionysos count the birth from Semele,
Zeus, and the reconstitution of Dionysos after being dismembered by the Titans (see
Orphic fragment 59). It is difficult to securely affirm that interpretation here, as our
poet explicitly considers Dionysos the son of Persephone (but see OH 46.6–7+n).
The matter is further complicated by the fact that Dionysos is said to have two
mothers at OH 50.1. This would indicate Persephone and Semele, but it is hard in
that case to reconcile the third birth as either Dionysos being born from Zeus' thigh
(which would seem to contradict the idea of Persephone as mother) or as the
reconstitution of the dismembered Dionysos (which would seem to be how some
Orphics worked in Semele as the mother of Dionysos). In other words, the births to
which “thrice-born” here refers are problematic, since there are four possible births
found in our sources (Semele, Zeus, Persephone, reconstitution), all of which are
alluded to at different points throughout the collection. The ambiguity, though, might
be intentional (see the introduction to this hymn).
3 ineffable, secretive: Just like the god, so too the cult. It is a typical characteristic of
mystery cults that certain aspects of their rites are known only to the privileged few
who have undergone initiation; cf. “pure” in line 4. See also OH 42.3, OH 50.3 and
OH 52.5.
3–4  two-horned  ...  /  ...  bull-faced:  The  bull  is  used  as  a  sacrificial  animal  in
Dionysian cult, and Dionysos, the suffering god, is sometimes identified with the
victim. Plutarch reports that the women of Elis called on Dionysos to come with the
following verses: “Come, o hero Dionysos/to the Eleans' temple/with the Graces/to
the pure temple/descend your oxen-foot/o worthy bull/o worthy bull” (Quaestiones
graecae 299a–b = PMG  871).  Likewise,  Pentheus,  under  the  spell  of  the  god,
experiences double vision and perceives him horned like a bull (Euripides Bacchae
918–924; cf. also 99–104 and 1017). Protogonos “bellows like a bull” in OH 6.(and see note to that line). Dionysos is bull-faced again at OH 45.1 and is described
as horned at OH 52.2 and 10, and OH 53.8. See also OH 50.5+n.
4 warlike: Dionysos occasionally engages in combat. Most famous is his participation in
the Gigantomachy (Apollodoros 1.6.2). In Euripides Bacchae, the maenads, roused

to  violence,  attack  a  village  and  rout  its  defenders  (751–764),  and  the  god  is
explicitly linked to the panic of war (303–304; cf. OH 11i and OH 32.6n). Korybas,
who seems to be an analogue for Dionysos, is also called “warlike” (OH 39.2+n). See
further OH 45.5+n.
4 pure
: Purity is essential in ritual, and, as in line 3, the god and his worshippers share
the same quality; see introduction as well as OH 15.8+8–9n, OH 40.11+n, OH 53.4,
and OH 84.4+n. The idea recurs in the Bacchic gold tablets; see the discussion in
Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 121–131.
5 raw flesh in triennial feasts: An important part of maenadism is the notion of
sparagmos,  the  ripping  apart  of  wild  animals  by  the  frenzied  women,  and  of
ōmophagia, the eating of the raw flesh afterward (see OH 52i). It is not known
whether  this  was  actually  practiced  in  cult  or  is  merely  a  mythological
embellishment. Dionysos is invoked as Omestes (Eater of Raw Flesh) by Alkaios
(fragment 129). See also OH 52.7, where Dionysos also is said to take raw flesh in
the hymn dedicated to him as God of Triennial Feasts.
5 wrapped in foliage, decked with grape clusters: Dionysos appears to be imagined
as the grape-vine itself at OH 50.5 (and see note to that line).
6 Eubouleus: Dionysos is also called this at OH 52.4. The name is also used of Zeus
and Adonis in the collection and elsewhere of Protogonos; see OH 6i and OH 41.8n.
8 fair-girdled nurses: A number of female divinities are called the nurses of Dionysos
in the collection: the Nymphs (OH 42.10, OH 46.3, OH 51.3, and OH 53.6; in this
last they are also called “fair-girdled”), Aphrodite (OH 46.3), and Hipta (OH 49.1).
See further OH 46.2–3n and OH 51.3n.
31. Hymn to the Kouretes
The Kouretes are a band of armed young men connected with Krete. In myth, they
dance about the infant Zeus and clatter their arms in order to muffle the sound of his
crying. Hesiod tells the story of how his mother, Rhea, was sent to Krete, but he does
not mention the Kouretes (Theogony 453–500). The poet, however, is aware of them,
for  in  one  of  the  fragments  from  the Catalogue  of  Women  he  mentions  them  as
“sportive, dancing gods” (fragment 123); they are either the siblings or cousins of the
satyrs and the mountain nymphs. Already in Hesiod, then, there is some relationship
with Dionysian figures. Kallimakhos narrates the story of their dancing around Zeus in
his Hymn  to  Zeus  52–54.  These  various  characteristics—percussive  sounds,  wild
dancing, mountain dwelling, and the link with Rhea—facilitated an identification with

the Korybantes of Kybele (see OH 14.3n and OH 27i), and the two names are often
interchangeable (e.g., OH 38.20 and cf. Kallimakhos Hymn to Zeus 46). Our hymn
blends Kretan and Phrygian imagery. The Kouretes, whose name translates as “youths,”
played a role in Kretan cult. A hymn found inscribed at Palaikastro in Krete addresses
Zeus as the “greatest kouros” and calls on him to usher in fertility for the new year. In
particular he is asked to “leap into” the fields, animals, and homes of the town to spark
fertility and bring wealth; see also OH 45.7n. A fragment from Euripides' Kretans hints
at an initiatory ritual that is possibly Orphic (fragment 472 = Orphic fragment 567).
Pythagoras is supposed to have been initiated in their cult at Mount Ida, where he also
allegedly saw the tomb of Zeus, who was considered to die and then be reborn each
spring. The existence of a religious fraternity that bore the name Kouretes at Ephesos
lends special significance to the whole collection (see Burkert 1985, p. 173). The
Kouretes also gained prominence within Orphic circles. They guard the infant Dionysos
on Krete, just as they guarded the infant Zeus (Orphic fragment 297), sometimes with
Athene (see OH 32i). However, they do not seem to be hiding him but outright guarding
him, and, unlike in the case of Zeus, they fail to protect him against the machinations of
the Titans. On occasion we find the Kouretes surrounding Dionysos in the material
record; for example, they appear on a relief from an altar at Kos, dated to the middle
second century BC (see Burkert 1993, pp. 270–271). Some sources have them guarding
the  infant  Persephone/Kore  as  well  (Orphic  fragment  279).  Athene  is  sometimes
imagined to be their leader (Orphic fragment 267–268), the overlap with dancing in
armor a clear point of contact (see Plato Laws 796d, where he also mentions the
Dioskouroi of Sparta). This helps explain why her hymn immediately follows; see OH
32i. The Kouretes are invoked by name in the fragmentary Gurôb Papyrus, shortly after
Demeter and Rhea, with whom they might have been explicitly connected as they are in
the Orphic fragments. For more information, see West 1983, pp. 166–168, Larson
2007, pp. 24–25, and Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 82–83. This hymn should be compared
to OH 38 and OH 39.
–4: In Greek cult, young men sometimes danced in armor, the most famous of which
was the pyrrhikhē, although this is sometimes used as a quasi-technical term to
describe all such dances. A number of origins for the pyrrhikhē were proposed by
ancient  scholars,  and  the  Kouretes  are  sometimes  thought  to  be  its  inventors.
Interestingly enough, Attic vase paintings sometimes have the very unwarlike satyrs
dancing in armor, a curious inversion of roles that may be parody or may hint at a
Dionysian connection with the dance (see Ceccarelli 2004, pp. 108–111). Other
armed dances were known, too, and they did not always take place in cultic settings.
For an example of such entertainment at a symposium performed by a woman, see
Xenophon Symposium 2.11. Armed young men dancing and singing in cult are also

found in Rome, where a group known as the Salii would dance and sing at certain
festivals; we find mention of a particular song, the carmen saliare, in ancient sources,
but what little text has come down to us is very corrupt.
3 discordant is the lyre you strike
: Harmony, both in music and in its more general
application to anything exhibiting a balanced structure, was an important component
of Greek morality, and we find writers, notably Plato, using the idea of harmonious
music as a symbol of order, civilization, and rationality. Conversely, the lack of
harmony often carries the opposite connotations. Thus, the cacophony implied by
this line goes hand-in-hand with the wild, “out of control” ecstatic dance movements
of the Kouretes and thus prepares for the mention of “mountain frenzy” in line (compare also the “howling” in line 2). See also OH 27.11n.
5  priests  in  the  train  of  a  mother: Compare OH 38.6, where the Kouretes are
mentioned as the “first to set up sacred rites for mortals.” In both passages, the
Kouretes gain significance as the mythical paradigm for the practitioners of the
actual ritual for which our collection was composed.
32. To Athene
Athene  is  one  of  the  chief  divinities  of  the  Greek  pantheon.  Her  life  begins  in
impressive  fashion.  Zeus  takes  as  his  first  wife  Metis  (Counsel,  Resourcefulness,
Wisdom) but finds out later that she is destined to give birth to a mighty daughter and a
son who will overthrow his father. Zeus' grandfather, Sky, had tried to forestall a similar
fate by pushing his children back into Earth's womb at birth, which did not work. His
son, Kronos, took the next step of swallowing his children at birth to avoid a similar
fate, but this, too, failed to prevent his demise. Zeus goes even further—he swallows the
mother before she is even able to give birth! Eventually, though, he gets a headache.
Hephaistos performs exploratory surgery and splits his head open with an axe—then
suddenly out pops a goddess, fully armed, shouting a lusty battle cry, and scaring the
assembled  gods.  Thus  Athene  makes  her  debut  on  the  cosmic  stage;  see  Hesiod
Theogony 886–900 and 924–926, Homeric Hymn to Athene (no. 28), Pindar Olympian
Odes 7.35–44, and Apollodoros 1.3.6. The motif was popular in Attic vase painting.
From the very beginning, then, Athene is associated with war. However, she is unlike
Ares, the other war god, in that he revels in the blood and gore of fighting, while she,
taking after her mother, is more interested in the intellectual aspects of strategy and
tactics (see OH 65i). The battle of Herakles and Kyknos, a son of Ares, in Hesiod's
Shield is, in some ways, a battle by proxy between these two divinities. War is not the
only pursuit to which she applies her wisdom. Athene is the goddess of all sorts of

handiwork, both in the female domain, such as weaving, and in the male domain, such
as  carpentry  (see  note  to  line  ).  She  is  very  much  a  figure  invested  in  human
civilization. Her closeness to the mortal sphere is reflected in her intimate relationship
with heroes, as for example when she appears to her favorite Odysseus, a hero after her
own mind, on Ithaka (Odyssey 13.221–440). She is also particularly connected with
Herakles. An instructive contrast to her relation with human beings would be the
aloofness of Apollon (see OH 34i), although she falls short of Dionysos' “possessive”
nearness (see OH 30i).
It is perhaps not surprising, then, that she was a very popular figure in cult, especially
at Athens, the city after which she seems to have been named. Her claim to this polis is
told in the story of her competition with Poseidon. They vied for the title of its chief
divinity and held a sort of contest. Poseidon caused a salt spring to gush forth on the
acropolis, while Athene planted an olive tree. She was chosen because of the utility of
her gift (see Herodotos 8.55 and Apollodoros 3.14.1–2). The most important festival in
Athens, the Panathenaia, was held every year in her honor, on the occasion of her
victory against the giants in the Gigantomachy. Every fourth year the Panathenaia was
more elaborately celebrated and included athletic and poetic contests. The cultural
hegemony of Athens throughout the centuries ought not to blind us, however, to her
extensive worship throughout all of Greece. For example, Kallimakhos' fifth hymn,
known as the Bath of Pallas, alludes to a rite at Argos during which her cult image, the
Palladion, was washed in the river Inakhos and carried with the shield of Diomedes in a
procession (1–56). For more information on her role in myth and cult, see Burkert
1985, pp. 139–143, and Larson 2007, pp. 41–57.
Orphism seems to have accepted her traditional birth (see Orphic fragment 263–and cf. also Mousaios fragment 75), but she is given a special role in accounts of the
infant Dionysos' death at the hands of the Titans. She saves the still beating heart of the
dismembered  child  and  returns  it  to  Zeus,  who  later  brings  about  the  rebirth  of
Dionysos (see OH 44i). Such a connection between these divinities may seem odd at
first glance, but there are a number of points of contact. Both were prominent at
Athens, both were born from the body of Zeus (head, thigh), both are famous for their
role in the Gigantomachy (see note to line 12), and both have a connection with
vegetation (olive, ivy). Athene, like Dionysos, is sometimes associated with mountains
(see note to lines 4–5) and madness (see note to line 6), while both have a touch of the
androgynous about them (see note to line 10). Her role in saving his heart might have
been influenced by the story of the Athenian king Erikhthonios. He was born when
Hephaistos, enamored of Athene, wanted to make love to her. She refuses his advances
(cf. line 8), but some of his semen falls on her thigh. Disgusted, she wipes it off with
wool, and throws it down upon the earth, which, thus fecundated, becomes pregnant and
gives birth to a child. This child Athene hides in a box with a serpent (in some versions

the child himself is serpentine) and entrusts the box to the daughters of the Athenian
king  Kekrops  with  orders  not  to  open  it.  Of  course  they  disobey  the  order,  and
eventually they are either killed by the snake or, driven mad by Athene, leap from the
acropolis to their death (see Euripides Ion 20–26 and 267–274, Pausanias 1.18.2, and
Apollodoros 3.14.6). Athene's protection of a child, the chthonic character of this child,
and the element of madness could easily have suggested to the person who originated
the Orphic tale a way to work in Athene. Furthermore, the infant Dionysos is guarded
by the Kouretes, whose leader is sometimes said to be Athene (see OH 31i). In one
sense, then, this virgin goddess has a somewhat analogous relationship to her younger
half-brother Dionysos as Artemis does to Apollon, whose birth she assists shortly after
her own in some versions of the story (see OH 36i). Both goddesses are also virgin
goddesses  who  can  offer  protection  (to  young  people  and  warriors),  and  in  our
collection both are associated with mountains, are described as masculine, and are said
to be fond of madness (see note to lines 4–5 and 10 below). The connection with the
Kouretes, mountains, and madness also brings Athene into connection with Kybele, the
Phrygian mother goddess (see OH 27i) as well as Rhea (see OH 14i). Athene, then, is
intricately bound up in a web of associations centered around chthonic divinities.
This role of the Kouretes and Athene in the (re)birth of Dionysos in the tradition
probably explains why their hymns follow the first one in the collection addressed to
him. Apollon also has a part to play in the Titans' attack on Dionysos, and this might
well be the reason why the hymns to Apollon and the Titans (OH 34 and OH 37) occur
in this sequence, too. The first hymn to Dionysos functions symbolically as his “birth,”
and it is not surprising that we find in quick succession a number of divinities (along
with related ones subordinated to them) at this point in the collection. The second hymn
to the Kouretes and the one to Korybas form a bridge to the one to Eleusinian Demeter
(OH 38–40; see OH 39i), which is the first hymn of the central group that focuses on
Dionysos in his cultic aspects (see OH 40i).
This hymn to Athene should be compared to the two Homeric hymns in her honor
(nos. 11 and 28) and Proclus' Hymn to Athene Polymetis (no. 7). The fact that the name
Athene never appears in the collection as well as this hymn's lack of attention to
Athenian myth suggests that the composer is consciously presenting the goddess as a
Panhellenic (or even Panmediterranean) divinity.
1 Pallas: A common alternate name of Athene, who is often invoked with both. The
ancients interpreted the name to mean “brandisher, shaker (of arms)” or “virgin.”
Another attempt at etymology was offered in Orphism, where the name was thought
to refer to the fact that Athene saved Dionysos' heart while it was still “shaking,” i.e.,
beating (see Clement of Alexandria Protrepticus 2.18.1 and West 1983, p. 162). In
some accounts, Pallas is the name of a giant that Athene killed in the Gigantomachy

and from whom she took the name (see note to line 12 and Burkert 1985, p. 140).
This giant is said to be her father in some versions of this story, thus offering a faint
reflection of the implicit threat to Zeus that Athene and her unborn brother once
posed (compare also her role with Poseidon and Hera in a failed coup against Zeus at
Iliad 1.396–406). The name Pallas appears in the Gurôb Papyrus; see Graf/Johnston
2007, pp. 188–189.
–5 hilltops / ... mountains: One of Athene's most important cult functions was her
role as protector of the polis, and so she was often worshipped on fortifications built
on top of hills and mountains used to defend the polis (see Burkert 1985, p. 140, for
a list of historical sites). In this context, though, her association with mountains
connects her to Dionysos as well as other figures such as the Kouretes (see OH 31.2,
5), Artemis (see OH 36i), and Kybele (see OH 27i).
6 frenzy: The madness here is associated with that of battle (see, e.g., Odyssey 22.297–
309). In some versions of Athene's birth, the gods standing about Zeus recoil in
terror as she leaps out in full panoply, roaring. Ares is connected with battle rage
(see OH 65.6+7n), and Pan, too, is a source of panic on the battlefield and elsewhere
(see OH 11i). But madness, as well as loud noise, are also typical characteristics of
Dionysos (for noise, see OH 30.1n; cf. OH 30.4n). Athene is also said to cause
madness in the wicked (line 9) and to be “frenzy-loving” (line 11), the latter epithet
also being used of Pan (see OH 11.5, 21). Similar descriptions are used of other
divinities, particularly Kybele, with whom the Korybantes/Kouretes are associated
(see OH 27.13+n).
8 slayer of Gorgo: The epithet is also applied to Athene at Euripides Ion 1478; earlier
in the play, the story of Athene's triumph over the giant Gorgo in the Gigantomachy
is briefly mentioned (987–997); see also note to line 12. After slaying this monster,
Athene strips him of his breastplate, which was adorned with snakes. This is the
aegis, a common prop for Athene in both literature and iconography. It is sometimes
related  to  Medousa,  whom  Perseus  slew  with  the  help  of  Hermes  and  Athene
(Apollodoros 2.4.2). In Pindar fragment 70b.17–18, the hissing snakes of Athene's
aegis contribute to the gods' celebration of Dionysian rites (see also OH 36.2n).
8 blessed mother of the arts: The intelligence of Athene finds outlet not only in war
but in skilled labor: for a list, see Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite 5.8–15. Hesiod calls a
carpenter the “servant of Athene” (Works  and  Days 430). She is credited with
assisting in the building of the Trojan Horse (Odyssey 8.492–495) and Jason's ship,
the Argo (Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika 1.18–20, 526–527, etc.). This goddess
is  sometimes  worshipped  under  the  title  of  Ergane  (Worker),  e.g.,  at  Athens
(Pausanias 1.24.3). The school of Anaxagoras rationalized Athene as skill (tekhnē)

personified (see Betegh 2004, p. 286).
9 you bring prudence to the virtuous: Athene was identified with prudence by the
Stoics; see West 1983, pp. 242–243.
10 male and female: Similarly in Proclus' Hymn to Athene Polymetis 7.3. Athene's close
association with heroes, her virginity, and her many pursuits that were typically
reserved for men all combined to give the goddess a particularly masculine bent (as
she  declares  herself  at  Aeschylus Eumenides  736–738).  Likewise,  she  can  be
portrayed as rejecting what was considered to be typically feminine behaviors; see
Telestes PMG 805 (preserved in Athenaios 14.616f–617a), where it is denied that
Athene had rejected playing the pipes because they disfigured her face (and where it
is asserted that she gave them to Dionysos as a gift), and also Kallimakhos Bath of
Pallas 13–32. In this collection, though, she is one among a number of divinities that
are addressed as androgynous, including Artemis and Dionysos; see OH 9.4n.

10 shrewd: The Greek word for “shrewd” is “mētis,” a play on the name of Athene's
mother; see introduction to this hymn. Note that in Orphism Metis is one of the
names applied to Protogonos (see OH 6i).
11 many shapes: Athene often takes disguises when dealing with mortals, particularly
in the Odyssey; note especially Odysseus' acknowledgment at 13.313. However, this,
too, is a characteristic shared by many of the divinities in the collection.
12 Phlegraian Giants: For the battle of the Gigantomachy, see Apollodoros 1.6.1–and Proclus Hymn to Athene Polymetis 7.4. In addition to Pallas (see note to line 1)
and Gorgo (see note to line 8), Athene also kills the giant Enkelados by tossing the
island Sicily on him, perhaps reminiscent of how her father defeats Typhon (see OH
23.5–7n).
12 driver of horses: According to Pindar (Olympian Odes 13.63–82), Athene invented
the bridle and gave it to Bellerophon so he could tame Pegasos, and in gratitude he
established an altar to Athene Hippias (Athene the “horse-rider” or “knight”). There
was also an altar to Athene Hippias at Olympia (Pausanias 5.15.6). Appropriately
enough, she is Diomedes' charioteer during his battle against Ares (Iliad 5.793–863).
13  victorious  Tritogeneia:  The  Greek  word  “nikēphore,”  “victory-bringing,”
anticipates the following hymn to Nike (Victory); it was also a cult title of Athene at
Pergamon. The name Tritogeneia is obscure. It appears already in Homer as an
epithet of the goddess (Iliad 4.515). Hesiod (Theogony 894–898) seems to interpret
it as Athene being “born for three” (for herself, her mother, and her unborn brother).
The name was also connected in antiquity with Lake Triton, said to be the location
of her birth or where she was raised; both the one in Boiotia and the one in Libya
were given this honor (see Aeschylus Eumenides 292–294, Pausanias 1.14.6 and
9.33.7).
16 health: This is also one of the items Proclus requests of Athene at the close of his
Hymn to Athene Polymetis 7.43–44. Athene was also worshipped as Health in Athens
(see Plutarch Pericles 13.8 and OH 68i).
33. To Nike
Nike (Victory) is first attested at Hesiod Theogony 383–385, where she is said to be the
daughter of Styx and Pallas and the sister of Zelos (Rivalry), Kratos (Power), and Bia
(Force). She never really evolves beyond her origin as a personified abstraction and
consequently plays no role in mythology or Orphic literature. At Athens, a temple to
Athene Nike was dedicated near the south entrance of the acropolis. The great statue of

Athene by Pheidias in the Parthenon portrayed Athene holding a winged Nike in her
right hand (Pausanias 1.24.7). We find a similar motif in another statue by Pheidias, this
one of Olympic Zeus at Olympia (Pausanias 5.11.1–10). Nike also had her own altar at
Olympia (Pausanias 5.14.8). She was a popular cult figure and frequently represented in
art; one of the most famous extant sculptures from the ancient world is the Nike of
Samothrace (see further OH 38i). The position of the hymn in our collection, following
the one to Athene, fits the pattern of inserting subordinate divinities immediately after
the governing one. Much of the hymn seems to focus on Nike's role in warfare (lines
–7), which is certainly consistent with the martial motif found in the preceding hymn
to Athene. Yet Nike could also be invoked in other agonistic contexts as well, and note
that Nike is asked to appear for “works of renown,” just as the Stars are asked to visit in
the  context  of  a  “race  for  works  of  renown”  (see OH  7.13+12–13n  and  cf. OH
76.12+n). Thus the ritual act the initiates are performing appears to merge with the
Homeric idea of winning glory in battle. This notion might have further significance
beyond endowing the initiation with a certain prestige. Some of the Bacchic gold tablets
suggest that the initiates felt that they would join the heroes of old in a pleasant afterlife
or even become a hero themselves (see OH 87.12n and Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 115–
116); “works of renown” might be referring to a similar idea here.
34. To Apollon
Apollon is one of the chief divinities of the Greek pantheon. Leto, a daughter of the
Titans Phoibe and Koios, is his mother and Zeus his father (Hesiod Theogony 404–408,
918–920). Artemis is his sister, sometimes born with him, sometimes born shortly
before and assisting Leto in his birth on the island Delos (see OH 35.5n). Apollon is a
god who presides over many spheres; listings of such are common in literature (e.g.,
Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.131–132, Plato Cratylus 405a, and Kallimakhos Hymn to
Apollon 42–46). He is perhaps most famous for his role in divination, with Delphi being
the most renowned of a plethora of oracles in his name. Both sickness and the healing
of sickness fall under his jurisdiction, and Asklepios is often said to be his son (see OH
67i). Apollon is also the god of archery. This is sometimes joined with his ability to
bring disease, as those whom he hits with his arrows suffer sickness and death (e.g.,
Iliad 1.43–52). Music, dance, and festivities are dear to him. He is the god of the lyre,
and the one who protects poets (Hesiod Theogony 94–95; Homeric Hymn to the Muses
and Apollon). It is very possible that his connection with the bow facilitated one with
this instrument (or vice versa); compare the vivid simile at Odyssey 21.404–411 and see
also OH 67.2n. Orpheus himself is sometimes said to have been one of his sons
(Apollodoros 1.3.2). In myth, he almost always appears as a young man, not quite an

adult, who can be somewhat dour and aloof, especially in his relation to human beings
(e.g., Iliad 21.461–467). Nevertheless, the god does have a sense of humor (as at
Odyssey 8.333–343), and his worship often involves joyous and extravagant displays of
music and pomp. Along with Hermes, he is idealized as a paragon of male beauty (see
Kallimakhos Hymn to Apollon 36–38). Gold and light are often used to describe him
and his implements (cf. the tongue-in-cheek treatment at Kallimakhos Hymn to Apollon
32–35). His identification with Sun perhaps begins in the late Archaic or early Classical
period and is quite common in Hellenistic times and afterward, as well as in Orphic
circles (see OH 8i). They were originally distinct entities, though, as can be seen in their
different genealogies in Hesiod Theogony (371–374 vs. 918–920). Apollon was as
popular in cult as he was in myth, and he was worshipped widely throughout the Greek-
speaking world. Delphi and Delos were his two main cult centers, but he was also
particularly important at Sparta and other Dorian cities. For more information, see
Burkert 1985, pp. 143–149, and Larson 2007, pp. 86–100; relevant details are noted
passim in the notes below. In Orphism, he sometimes brings to Delphi the remains of
his half-brother Dionysos, torn apart by the Titans, and there revives him (see OH 46i
for this story and Dionysian worship at Delphi). His role in Dionysos' death and rebirth
is probably the reason for the position of his hymn in the collection; see OH 32i. For his
possible parentage of the Eumenides in Orphic mythology, see OH 70.2–3n.
The structure of this hymn falls into two main divisions. The first part mentions the
various traditional associations of the god in terms of cult centers, attributes, and
epithets; it comes to an end in line , marked by a direct appeal to the god, an element
that usually closes a hymn. The second part picks up on the solar aspects mentioned in
the first and gives them a cosmic dimension, culminating in the expanded discourse of
universal harmony (lines 16–25). This hymn particularly recalls the earlier ones to Sun
(OH 8) and Pan (OH 11) and to a lesser extent Protogonos (OH 6). In some ways it
functions in a similar manner to OH 15–18 in that it fully anthropomorphizes the
fundamental abstract powers that constitute the universe (see OH 15i). The palpable
two-fold  division  is  curiously  reminiscent  of  that  in  the  longer  Homeric Hymn  to
Apollon, which easily falls into a Delian (3.1–178) and a Delphic (3.179–546) section
(and many scholars suppose that two originally separate hymns have been imperfectly
merged into one). It just may be that our composer took a cue from the Homeric hymn,
insofar as he understood it. There is a shorter Homeric Hymn to Apollon (no. 21) and
another one dedicated to both him and the Muses (no. 25). The reader will find it
fruitful to consult Kallimakhos' Hymn to Apollon (no. 2), as well as Mesomedes' and
Proclus' hymns to Sun. Apollon is also invoked with hymnic language in the magical
papyri, sometimes with Daphne, one of his mythological lovers (found in the following
spells: PGM 1.262–347; 2.1–64 and 64–184; 3.187–262; 6.1–47); compare also the
invocations of Sun therein (for further references, see OH 8i).

1 Paian: Paian seems originally to have been a completely separate divinity from
Apollon, but he eventually becomes subsumed under this god. Nevertheless, Paian
occasionally remains clearly distinguished, such as in the magical papyri (PGM
1.296–297). He gives his name to the “paian,” a particular type of song that has
strong associations with healing (Iliad 1.472–474; and cf. Iliad 5.899–904, where the
god Paieon heals Ares) and victory (Iliad 22.391–394). For an exhaustive overview
of both god and song, see Rutherford 2001. The cry “Ië” often accompanies an
invocation of Paian (see line 2); for a fanciful etymology, see Kallimakhos Hymn to
Apollon 97–104. In our collection, the name Paian is also used of Sun (OH 8.12),
Pan (OH 11.11), Dionysos (OH 52.11), and Apollon's son Asklepios (OH 67.1); the
alternate spelling Paion is used of Herakles (OH 12.10).
1 slayer of Tityos: This was a giant who tried to rape Leto during her wanderings after
she had given birth to Apollon and Artemis. He was shot dead by the baby Apollon
(and sometimes by his twin sister Artemis as well) from the arms of his mother. For
such a monstrous act, he was punished in a way similar to Prometheus, by having his
ever-regenerating liver continually eaten by vultures in the underworld. For the story,
see Odyssey 11.576–581 and Apollodoros 1.4.1–2. Artemis is also called “slayer of
Tityos” in Kallimakhos Hymn to Artemis 110.
1 Phoibos ... Lykoreus: Phoibos (Bright One) is a common epithet of Apollon, found
throughout the collection (OH O.7, OH 35.4, OH 67.6, OH 79.6). Lykoreus means
“the one of Lykoreia,” which is the name of the summit of Mount Parnassos at
Delphi  or  a  village  thereupon;  see  Strabo  9.3.3  and  Pausanias  10.6.2–3.  The
collocation of Phoibos and Lykoreus is also found at Kallimakhos Hymn to Apollon
19 and Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika 4.1490.
2  dweller  of  Memphis:  Apollon  is  routinely  identified  with  the  Egyptian  Horus
(Herodotos 2.156.5; Plutarch De Iside et Osiride 356a and 375f; PGM 4.455, 988–
989, and 1985). Apollon/Horus does not seem to be particularly connected with
Memphis, but perhaps our composer is positing a connection (or confusing him)
with Hephaistos/Sun, who was (Herodotos 2.153.1, and see Vanderlip 1972, p. 29 n.
8).
3 Titan: Technically speaking, Apollon is the grandson of a Titan, not a Titan himself;
cf. OH 36.2. However, Sun is also invoked as Titan in OH 8.2, and most likely
Apollon is being addressed here in his role as sun god. He is also called Titan at
PGM 2.86.
3 Pythian god: Pytho was another name used for Delphi or its environs. It is here that
Apollon slew a dragon that resided there and that was, in some versions, guarding the
oracle held by Earth (for this oracle, see OH 79.3–6n and 5n). This story is one of

the many variations of a hero slaying a dragon (see Fontenrose 1959 and Watkins
1995). After the monster was killed, Apollon crowed over the corpse that it rot on
the spot, and Sun obliged (note the close connection—and distinction—here of
Apollon and Sun, perhaps significant in light of their later identification). This was
said to be the origin of the name Python, coming from the Greek verb “puthō” (“I
rot”); hence the appellation “slayer of Python” in line . See Homeric Hymn to
Apollon  3.300–374  for  the  canonical  account.  The  story  also  served  as  the
foundational myth for the Pythian Games, one of the great Panhellenic events of
ancient times, second in prestige only to the Olympian Games. There were musical
contests  as  well  as  athletic  ones,  and  Sakadas,  a  three-time  champion  in  the
competition for instrumental music on the auloi, is credited with the creation of the
Pythian nome, a piece that used music to symbolically describe Apollon's victory
over the serpent and that quickly became a standard piece in the aulete's repertoire;
for more details, see West 1992, pp. 212–214.
4 Grynean, Sminthian: Gryneion was an Aeolic city near Kyme where a temple and an
oracle to Apollon existed. “Sminthian” is a cult epithet, already found in Homer
(Iliad 1.39). It is usually connected with a Greek word for mouse, and hence could
also be translated as “Mouser.” This connects Apollon with agriculture, as mice are
often a pestilence in the fields as well as the granary.
6 you lead the Muses into dance: Apollon is traditionally the leader of the Muses, and
together they entertain the gods (e.g., Iliad 1.601–604 and Homeric Hymn to Apollon
3.186–206), providing a divine paradigm to be emulated in the human realm. See
also OH 43i. The Homeric Hymn to the Muses and Apollon (no. 25) is probably a
hymnic variation on Hesiod Theogony 94–97 and 104.
7  Bacchos,  Didymeus,  Loxias: If “Bacchos” is the correct reading of “Bakkhie,”
Apollon is being identified with his half-brother. Note that Dionysos is called Paian
(OH 52.11) and that both gods are “wild” or “savage” (Apollon at line 5 and
Dionysos at OH 30.3). For the Delphic connection between the two, see OH 46i.
Apollon is called “ivy-tressed” in the magical papyri (PGM 2.99). In Neoplatonic
theology, both gods together with Sun form a triad (Orphic fragment 305(ii), 311(x),
and 322(v); van der Berg 2001, pp. 63 and 170), and in Proclus' hymn to Sun, both
Paian/Apollon and Dionysos are his children (1.21–24). One could, however, read
“Bakkhie” as “Bacchic” instead, and the evidence cited above could certainly also be
used to support this interpretation. Perhaps also relevant is that the Egyptian god
Osiris, who was identified with Dionysos, had a brother and a son named Horus,
both of whom were identified with Apollon (Herodotos 2.156.5; Plutarch De Iside et
Osiride 355e–356a). A couple of the manuscripts of the Orphic Hymns, though, have

“Brankhie.” This would refer to Brankhos, who was a lover of Apollon, and became
a seer at Didyma (Kallimakhos fragment 229, in Nisetich 2001, pp. 127–129), a
town near Miletos that in historic times was famous for its temple to Apollon and
oracle (Herodotos 1.42). Brankhos is also credited with delivering Miletos from a
plague  (Kallimakhos  fragment  194.28–31,  in  Nisetich  2001,  p.  105).  The
juxtaposition with “Didymeus” in our hymn perhaps speaks for reading “Brankhie.”
Loxias is a common epithet of Apollon. It means “the oblique one,” referring to the
riddling and enigmatic character for which Apollon's oracles are (in)famous (cf.
Herakleitos in Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983, no. 244; for a concrete example, see
the famous misinterpretation by Kroisos at Herodotos 1.53 and 1.90–91).
8 the eye that sees all
: Here Apollon is clearly identified with Sun; see OH 8.1+n. The
eye in this line is a terrestrial one, looking down on human activity. Compare with
the  “gaze”  in  line  11,  which  begins  the  second  section,  where  Apollon's  eye
encompasses the entire cosmos. When Orpheus invokes Apollon at the beginning of
the Rhapsodies, he addresses him as the “eye that sees all” (Orphic fragment 102; see
also West 1983, p. 6).
11–15: The classic tri-partite view of the world, already in Hesiod, is present here: sky-
earth-underworld. The expanse of Apollon's gaze is comparable to the power of
other divinities described elsewhere in the collection; see OH 10.14–16n. There may
also be an implied transition day-twilight-night, with the “day” component being
understood from the identification Apollon/Sun and his position in the ether.
16–23: The theme of cosmic harmony has already appeared at OH 8.9, 11, and OH
11.6, but here gets its most detailed treatment, being explicitly connected to the
seasons (already anticipated at OH 8.9 and perhaps OH 11.4). See OH 8.9n and 11n,
as well as OH 11i. The musical ideas expressed in this hymn seem to have been
drawn from Claudius Ptolemaeus (called Ptolemy in modern times), the famous
astronomer who was active at Alexandria in the second century AD. At Harmonics
3.12 he writes: “In connection with these movements, the Dorian tonos, being the
most central of the tonoi, we must compare to the middle crossings in latitude, those
positioned towards the equinox, as it were, in each sphere.... Those tonoi which on
account of their higher melody are higher than the Dorian are arranged as if in
summer, with the crossings at the raised pole, that is, where the North Pole rises, and
with those at the arctic, where the south [sic] is at the opposite. Those which on
account of their lower melody are lower than the Dorian are arranged as if in winter,
with the crossings at the invisible pole, that is, where the South Pole rises towards
those at the arctic, where the North is at opposite” (translation by Solomon 1999, pp.
160–161;  see  also  Barker  1989,  pp.  386–387).  The  geocentric  view  we  find

elsewhere in the collection (see OH 4.3+n) might also have been influenced by
Ptolemy. If there is a connection between him and the Hymns, this would provide a
fairly secure terminus post quem of around 200 AD for their composition (see further
the introduction to the translation). A mode in ancient times represented a collection
of notes of certain pitches at fixed intervals out of which a melody might be
composed, a kind of tonal palette. Aristides Quintilianus preserves six that he terms
ancient ones, among them the Dorian (18.5–19.10; see Barker 1989, pp. 419–420,
for translation and notes; see also the discussion in Barker 1984, pp. 165–166). The
term Ptolemy employs, “tonos,” can also be used to mean “mode,” or it can signify
what we would call a key (see Barker 1989, pp. 17–27, and West 1992, pp. 184–
189). Traditionally, the Dorian mode had the characteristics of being steady, calm,
and restrained (it was also considered to be the most manly and dignified; see West
1992, pp. 179–180). Ptolemy, as seen in the quote above, gives a similar valuation to
the Dorian tonos as the means between extremes (see also Harmonics 3.7). The
emphasis on the Dorian in our hymn might also have been facilitated by Apollon's
prominence among Dorian areas such as Sparta and Krete (see introduction). One of
the most famous dictums of the ancient world, “mēden agan” (“nothing in excess”),
was inscribed on the temple of Apollon at Delphi. Sun in Proclus' first hymn is said
to fill the cosmos with harmony (1.23; see further van den Berg 2001, pp. 169–and line  of that hymn), while his son Phoibos calms the strife of elements as he
sings to the kithara (1.13–14 and 19–20; see van den Berg 2001, pp. 168–169).
24–25: For Pan and his “whistling winds” see OH 11.10–12+n. Sun is also associated
with string and wind instruments (OH 8.11). All three divinities are called Paian in
their hymns (see note to line 1). An identification of Pan and Apollon is not as far-
fetched as it may seem at first blush. Besides their association with music, both are
pastoral gods (see Euripides Alkestis 1–7 and Kallimakhos Hymn to Apollon 47–54).
Pan is connected with Mount Lykaion (“wolf mountain”) in Arkadia (see Larson
2007, p. 151) and Apollon is sometimes called “Lykeios” (which can mean “wolf-
like, of a wolf”; Pan also bore this name at Tegea). Both Apollon and Pan, among
other gods, were also worshipped on Mount Kotilion in Arkadia (see Larson 2007, p.
99). Apollodoros (1.4.1) tells us that Apollon learned prophecy from Pan, but this
Pan is said to be the son of Zeus and Hybris and thus to be distinguished from the
Pan whose father is Hermes (see OH 11i). Nevertheless, such a fine distinction might
well be lost or misunderstood, and it is possible that our composer was influenced by
an account that made the god Pan Apollon's teacher (a relationship perhaps even
intentionally  imitating  the  centaur  Kheiron's  traditional  role  in  training  mortal
heroes, including in the arts of music).

35. To Leto
Leto is the daughter of the Titans Koios and Phoibe (Hesiod Theogony 404-408; see
also line 2 of this hymn). Her importance in Greek myth is fully derived from that of
her children, Apollon and Artemis. Hesiod emphasizes her gentle ways; compare also
Iliad 21.497–504 and the folk-etymologies of her name at Plato Cratylus 406a–b.
However, even she can be roused to anger, such as when Niobe boasts of her own
children  (Ovid Metamorphoses  6.146–312).  She  sometimes  has  her  own  cult  (see
Burkert 1985, pp. 171–172), but her role in cult is more often subordinate to one or
both of her children, and she seems to have played no role in Orphic myth.
5 Ortygia, ... Delos: Ortygia (from the Greek “ortux,” meaning “quail”), is sometimes
another name for Delos, e.g., in Kallimakhos Hymn to Apollon 2.59. Leto's sister
Asteria, while fleeing the advances of Zeus, turns herself into a quail, dives into the
ocean, and becomes the island Delos (Apollodoros 1.4.1). However, these two places
are often distinguished from each other, as in Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.16, which
is identical to line 5 of this hymn. If Ortygia is to be understood as a separate place,
one likely candidate is the small island Rheneia that lies opposite Delos and that,
according  to  Strabo  10.5.5,  once  was  called  Ortygia.  Thucydides  reports  that
Polykrates, the tyrant of Samos in the middle of the sixth century BC, once chained
the two islands together (3.104). Perhaps our composer sees them as two parts that
form a unity, for he does refer to Apollon and Artemis as twins in line 1, which
would be difficult to reconcile if their respective places of birth were significantly far
apart. Nevertheless, calling them twins is conventional, and the “problem” might not
have been felt as such; the gods, after all, are capable of many wonders. Of the other
places known as Ortygia, the most likely alternate candidate would be the sacred
grove near Ephesos, where a competing narrative of the birth of Apollon and
Artemis was told (Strabo 14.1.20; for the importance of Ephesos for Artemis, see
OH 36i). The more traditional account places the birth of Apollon (and sometimes
Artemis) on Delos (see Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.14–139, Kallimakhos Hymn to
Delos, and Apollodoros 1.4.1). Note that Artemis is called Ortygia at Sophokles
Women of Trakhis 213, and in the Birds, Aristophanes puns on a Greek word to call
Leto “quail-mother” (870).
36. To Artemis
Artemis, like her brother Apollon, governs many different spheres, some contradictory.
She loves to hunt wild animals with her bow and arrow, yet she also protects them.
Artemis is called “Mistress of Animals” (e.g., Iliad 21.470) and often appears as such in

early iconography, usually winged, with animals to her left and/or right that she holds in
a firm grasp (e.g., Boardman 1991, pl. 46.2). The wilderness is her domain, particularly
forests and mountains, far away from human settlements, but she is also a goddess who
protects cities. As our hymn mentions in lines 3–5, she assists in childbirth (including
that of her brother, Apollon, according to Apollodoros 1.4.1), even though, as a virgin
goddess (Homeric Hymn  to  Aphrodite 5.16–20), she never experiences this process
herself. Similarly, she is the one who protects and nurtures the young, while at other
times  she  is  blamed  for  the  premature  deaths  of  children.  As  with  many  Greek
divinities, the ability to do one thing entails the capacity for its opposite, particularly
expressed in terms of preservation versus destruction.
The dark side of the goddess is seen in her connection, at least in myth, with human
sacrifice. While the Greek army is mustering at Aulis for the expedition to Troy,
Agamemnon kills a deer sacred to Artemis. The goddess prevents the Greeks from
sailing,  and  the  seer  Kalkhas  reveals  that  the  only  way  to  propitiate  her  is  for
Agamemnon to sacrifice his daughter Iphigeneia as recompense for the slaying of
Artemis' “daughter.” The father grimly complies (see, e.g., Aeschylus Agamemnon 104–
257). In some versions of the story, Artemis substitutes a deer for Iphigeneia at the last
moment, unbeknownst to the men. This is the storyline adopted in Euripides' Iphigeneia
at Tauris, but here, too, human sacrifice plays a role: Iphigeneia has been made Artemis'
priestess in this barbarous land and now presides over the sacrifice of strangers (cf.
Herodotos 4.103.1–2). Her brother Orestes comes to rescue her. They steal the statue of
the goddess and bring it back to Athens, where a ritual is enacted that involves a
worshipper slightly slitting his throat and letting the drops of blood fall on the altar.
Artemis' belligerent nature appears in the great slugfest among the gods at Iliad 21.468–
496, during which she chides her brother for refusing to fight Poseidon and then is
soundly thrashed when confronted by her step-mother Hera.
Yet there is a joyous side to her as well. Nymphs typically attend her as she roams the
countryside and hunts. She is also a leader of the dance and song, often as her brother
Apollon provides the music (see, e.g., Homeric Hymn to Artemis 27.11–20 and Homeric
Hymn to Apollon 3.186–206). In fact, dances of young girls, particularly those on the
cusp of marriage, are a prevalent feature of her worship (for a possible example of
which, see Alkman PMGF 1). Many of her cults, such as the famous one in the Attic
deme of Brauron, are centered on the feminine spheres under her control, which include
childbirth and protection of the young. Her most important cult site was in Asia Minor
at Ephesos, where her sanctuary numbered among the ancient wonders of the world.
According to Kallimakhos, it was the Amazons who instituted sacrifice for Artemis, by
setting up a statue and dancing a war dance around it (Hymn to Artemis 237–258). For
more on her worship, see Burkert 1985, pp. 149–152, and Larson 2007, pp. 101–113.

Artemis became assimilated with many divinities over time (cf. “of many names” in
line 1). Her worship at Ephesos was a result of being identified with Kybele (see OH
27i), a connection perhaps facilitated through their shared association with mountains
and  lions  (see OH  27.2+n;  lions  often  appear  in  the  “Mistress  of  the  Animals”-
iconography). The Thracian goddess Bendis, who is at times identified with Kybele, is
also matched with Artemis (Orphic fragment 257). Very common is Artemis' merging
with Moon, and thence with Hekate, as at Orphic fragment 356, where Tyche is also
added (see further OH 1i, OH 9i, and OH 72.2n). Artemis' concern with childbirth and
association with Moon also naturally link her with Eileithyia; see OH 2i. Thus the
hymns to Hekate (OH 1) and Moon (OH 9) should also be read closely with this one.
Compare further the two Homeric hymns to Artemis (nos. 9 and 27) and Kallimakhos'
Hymn to Artemis. She plays very little role in Orphism, and consequently our hymn
focuses on her traditional attributes.
2 Titanic: Apollon is also called a Titan; see OH 34.3+n.
2 Bacchic: Compare also “frenzy-loving” in line 5. Artemis and Dionysos share many
traits: mountain haunts, blood-thirsty savagery, Eastern associations, and groups of
female  followers.  Artemis  joins  a  divine  Dionysian thiasos  in  Pindar  fragment
70b.19–21, and Timotheus (PMG 778(b)) might be describing her as a maenad. As
“Bacchic” and “torch-bearing” (line 3), she might be so imagined here as well; see
OH 1.3+n and OH 52i. For a possible identification of Apollon and Bacchos, see OH
34.7n.
3  torch-bearing  goddess  bringing  light  to  all:  This  imagery  evokes  Artemis'
identification with Moon and Hekate; see OH 9.3n. In Orphic fragment 400, Artemis
appears in a list of alternate names for Persephone, which also include Torch-Bearer
and Light-Bringer (see also OH 40.11+n). She is also called a bringer of light at
Kallimakhos Hymn to Artemis 204.
3 Diktynna: This is a Kretan goddess, who is sometimes identified with Artemis
(Euripides Hippolytos 145–147) or made into one of her companions (Pausanias
2.30.3). The maiden fled the amorous attentions of Minos by leaping into the sea (cf.
the story of Ino; see OH 74i), where she was rescued in the nets of a fisherman (see
Kallimakhos Hymn to Artemis 189–203). Hence she was called Diktynna, Lady of
Nets (Greek “diktuon” means “net”). The name, however, in reality is probably to be
connected with Mount Dikte, as in Kallimakhos' telling of the myth. The epithet
“lady of Kydonia” in line 12 below refers to the Kretan town, where there was a
temple to Diktynna (Herodotos 3.59.2; Strabo 10.4.13). For more on this goddess,
see Larson 2007, pp. 177–178.

6 roam in the night: For Moon's movement at night, see OH 9.2. Hekate is also closely
associated with night; see OH 1.5.
7  masculine:  There  are  a  number  of  goddesses  who  are  called  masculine  in  the
collection; see OH 9.4n.
8 Orthia: This might refer to a temple of Artemis on Mount Lykone in Argos, which
also contained cult statues of Apollon and Leto (Pausanias 2.24.5). However, it is
more likely an alternate spelling of Ortheia, a Spartan goddess who comes to be
identified with Artemis. Part of her worship included boys enduring lashes from
their fellows at her altar in a test of endurance; see Pausanias 3.16.7–11, who also
gives an account of the origin of the wooden cult statue of the goddess. It is perhaps
of note that he says a sanctuary to Eileithyia is not far from the one to Ortheia
(3.17.1).
37. To the Titans
The Titans in myth are a group of twelve beings born of Earth and Sky, along with the
three Kyklopes and three Hundred-Handers. For the story of their birth and their
problems with Sky, and later Zeus, see OH 4i and OH 13i. In Orphic mythology, the
Titans,  sometimes  spurred  by  Hera,  become  jealous  when  Zeus  places  the  infant
Dionysos on his throne. They paint their faces and, with the help of toys and a mirror,
lure the child away from the throne despite his being guarded by the Kouretes. They
then kill him and eat his corpse. Zeus eventually finds out about this horrid crime and
incinerates the Titans with his lightning bolts. The heart of Dionysos is saved by Athene,
and this heart serves as the basis for the god's reconstitution. Out of the smoldering
ashes of the Titans, charged with Zeus' lightning bolts, is born the human race. Our
knowledge of this story comes from later sources, and it is not clear how far back it
goes: see Orphic fragment 57–59 and 301–331, West 1983, pp. 74–75, Burkert 1985,
pp. 297–298, and Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 66–93. For the significance of this myth for
Orphism, see the introduction to the translation. Our hymn obliquely refers to this origin
of the human race in lines 2 and 4, and it is expanded to include all living things in line
5; see also OH 78.11–12+n, and cf. OH 10.14–16+n. The murder of Dionysos is
tactfully left out.
3 Tartarean homes: After their defeat by Zeus, the Titans are cast down into Tartaros,
a primeval being who had become a particularly gloomy part of the underworld; see
OH 18.2n. There they are imprisoned, guarded by the monstrous Hundred-Handers
(Hesiod Theogony 717–735). Despite being locked up in mythology's version of
Alcatraz, they can still wreak harm on the upper world. They are among the gods

Hera invokes when she strikes the earth with the palm of her hand in a request to
give birth apart from Zeus to a powerful child; this results in Typhon, a great monster
that threatens the gods and is eventually defeated by Zeus (Hesiod Theogony 820–
880). She makes a similar, if less sinister, appeal at Iliad 14.271–279.
38. To the Kouretes
This  is  the  second  hymn  in  the  collection  addressed  to  the  Kouretes;  for  more
information  on  these  figures,  see OH  31i.  That  hymn  concentrates  on  their  more
traditional associations with Krete and the Phrygian Kybele. This hymn integrates the
Kouretes into a more wide-ranging grouping popular in late antiquity that brought
together a number of originally independent bands of male divinities involved with
soteriological mystery cults. Explicitly mentioned are the gods of the island Samothrace
(lines  and 21) and the Dioskouroi (line 21). The cult on Samothrace seems to have
had pre-Greek origins but later developed into a Greek mystery cult. It became very
popular after the Classical period; one of the most famous statues from antiquity, the
Nike of Samothrace, now in the Louvre, was dedicated to the gods of this cult for a
naval victory (second century BC). They were in particular supposed to protect sailors
from drowning at sea. After a friend had pointed out the dedications from rescued
sailors at Samothrace as proof that the gods must exist, the notorious atheist Diagoras of
Melos (late fifth century BC) is reputed to have quipped that dead men do not make
dedications (Cicero De natura deorum 3.89). For more on this mystery cult, see Burkert
1985, pp. 281–285, and Larson 2007, p. 174. The brothers of Helen, Kastor and
Polydeukes, were also called on to aid sailors in distress. The phenomenon now known
as St. Elmo's fire was in antiquity considered to be their epiphany (see Alkaios fragment
34 and the Homeric Hymn to the Dioskouroi no. 33). In myth, they are the sons of
Tyndareus, a king of Sparta. Homer in the Iliad considers them to be mortal (3.236–
244), but later tradition holds Polydeukes, along with Helen, to be descended from Zeus,
who surreptitiously mated with Tyndareus' wife Leda in the form of a swan. She gave
birth  to  two  pairs  of  twins,  the  male  Kastor  and  Polydeukes  and  the  female
Klytemnestra and Helen, the first child in each pair descended from Tyndareus and the
second from Zeus. Kastor was granted immortality at the request of his brother, but
they alternate their time in the land of the living with their time in the kingdom of the
dead (see Odyssey 11.298–304 and Pindar Nemean Odes 10.80–82). They thus can be
construed, like Dionysos, as gods who die and are reborn, which may help explain their
merging  with  the  gods  of  Samothrace  and  the  Kouretes  here.  In  fact,  the  name
Dioskouroi is a composite meaning “Zeus' [dios] young men [kouroi],” “kouroi” being
linguistically related to the “kour-” in Kouretes (a word meaning “youths”; see OH 31i).

Like the Kouretes, they also dance a pyrrhikhē (see Plato Laws 796d and OH 31.1–4n).
This hymn equates the Kouretes, the Dioskouroi, and the gods of Samothrace by
associating these figures with the winds that are connected with fertility and the dangers
of the sea; what binds these two ideas together, in turn, is the idea that certain winds
come at certain seasons (cf. Hesiod's extended discourse on the topic at Works and Days
618–694). This hymn should be compared to those addressed to Leuokothea and
Palaimon (OH 74–75), the winds Boreas, Zephyros, and Notos (OH 80–82), the other
hymn to the Kouretes (OH 31), the one to Korybas (OH 39), and the two Homeric
hymns to the Dioskouroi (nos. 17 and 33).
–2: The hymn opens with traditional attributes of the Kouretes. The percussive sound
of the beating of brazen arms is analogous to the bronze clappers and cymbals used
in ecstatic cult, particularly that of Kybele (see OH 27.11n).
2 dwellers of heaven, of earth and sea: Compare also line 8. Numerous divinities in
this collection are connected with these three realms; see OH 10.14–16n. There is a
natural analogue to this, though, since the Kouretes are identified with the winds,
which are physically present in all three.
3 life-giving breezes: The Kouretes are connected with fertility, as they are in Kretan
cult (see OH 31i), but here, and in lines 22 and 24, they are identified with the winds
that  blow  throughout  the  world.  The  association  is  perhaps  facilitated  by  the
connection of the Kouretes with Zeus, the storm and weather god. In our collection
Hera, who is associated with air, sends “soft breezes” that “nourish the soul” (see OH
16.3+n).
6 first to set up sacred rites for mortals: The Kouretes, as in OH 31.5, are portrayed
as mythical paradigms for actual cult practice; see further OH 76.7+n.
13–19: The typical Greek conception that what a god gives can also be taken away by
the same god is found here. This is further strengthened by the identification with
winds, which can be gentle and beneficial or powerful and destructive. As with many
other hymns in the collection, the composer is aware of this contradictory dichotomy
so essential to Greek religious thought. The negative side is acknowledged in these
lines; the positive side is explicitly desiderated at the end (lines 24–25).
20–21 Kouretes, Korybantes, ... / masters of Samothrace, true Dioskouroi: The
hymn reaches a crescendo with the aggregation of various appellations. The Kabeiroi
in the opening address to Mousaios seem to be viewed as another name for the
Dioskouroi; see OH O.20+20–22n and OH 39i.

39. To Korybas
Korybas is the singular form of Korybantes, the group of priests and adherents of
Kybele who were known to practice rites designed to cure madness (see OH 27.13n) and
who were often equated with the Kouretes (see OH 31i). In this regard, it is significant
that Korybas is called Koures, the singular of Kouretes, in line 3 (and see below).
Sometimes Korybas is said to be the son of Kybele and the eponymous father of the
Korybantes (Diodorus Siculus 5.49). Hippolytos reports of a hymn to Attis, well-known
in his time, which was understood by the Naassenes, a sect of Christianity, as expressing
their  own  beliefs  (Refutation  of  All  Heresies  5.9.8;  translation  and  discussion  in
Borgeaud 2004, pp. 106–107). In this hymn, Attis is said to have been called Adonis by
the Assyrians, Osiris by the Egyptians, Adamna by the Samothracians, Korybas by the
Haemonians,  and  Papas  by  the  Phrygians.  “Haemonians”  is  a  synecdoche  for
Thessalians, a people infamous for its witches (see OH 1.1n).
Clement of Alexandria in his Protrepticus relates a foundational myth for the rites of
the Korybantes (2.19). In this story, they are three brothers; two of the brothers kill the
third; they then cover the body with a purple cloth and garlands, convey it on a bronze
shield,  and  bury  it  on  the  foothills  of  Mount  Olympos.  Clement  summarizes  the
mysteries succinctly as “murders and burials.” This story is almost certainly alluded to in
line 6 of this hymn. If so, we see that Korybas, thus foully murdered, becomes a restless
spirit roaming the earth and potentially wreaking vengeance on any he encounters by
driving them to madness; compare with the Erinyes and Melinoe (see OH 69i and OH
71.4–5+n). Like Melinoe, he is also called on to avert the horrid phantoms he is also
capable of sending (see OH 71.11n).
Clement  further  identifies  these  brothers  with  the  Kabeiroi,  another  group  of
divinities found in mystery cults. In fact, these gods are equated at times with those of
Samothrace. They are mentioned in the opening address to Mousaios with the Kouretes
and Korybantes (see OH O.20–22+n), and it seems likely that the association is lurking
in the background here, more tightly connecting Korybas with the previous hymn to the
Kouretes who are invoked as Samothracian gods (OH 38.4, 21; compare also the Attis
hymn cited above). What is more, Clement says that the brothers as fugitives took a
basket containing the genitals of their dead brother, now called Dionysos, to Etruria,
where they established his worship (cf. OH 46i). He ends his account by acknowledging
that some people with reason call Dionysos Attis. The connection is significant, because
Attis castrates himself after suffering madness sent by Kybele (see OH 27i). A loose
identification among Attis, Dionysos, and Korybas seems to lie at the heart of our
hymn. It is probably as a doublet of Dionysos that Korybas is called “the greatest king
of eternal earth” (line 1) and “warlike” (line 2 see note) and this identification helps
explain why the hymn follows one dedicated to the Kouretes, who in Orphic accounts

guard the enthroned infant Dionysos (see OH 31i).
The merging of identities is further underscored by the presence of Demeter in this
hymn, called Deo in line . This goddess is sometimes equated with Rhea and Kybele
(see OH 14i and OH 27i). Clement, in his discussion of the Korybantic rites, notes that
the priests, called “Lords of the Rites” (Greek “Anaktotelestai”), do not allow celery to
be placed on the altar, since they consider it to have been born from the blood of the
murdered brother. He then compares this taboo with the worship of Demeter during the
Thesmophoria festival, where pomegranate seeds that have fallen on the floor are
forbidden to be consumed on the grounds that such seeds were born from the blood of
Dionysos. Clement's discussion of the Eleusinian Mysteries frames his account of the
rites  of  the  Kabeiroi.  Interestingly  enough,  Psellos  at Quaenam  sunt  graecorum
Opiniones de daemonibus 3 says that a Korybas and a Koures were mimetic forms of
demons who were included in the initiation to the Eleusinian Mysteries. Prima facie,
this indicates that the pair Korybas/Koures belonged to that part of Orphic/Dionysiac
demonology that became connected with Eleusis, at least in the minds of those who
tried  to  unravel  the  mysteries.  It  is  therefore  no  surprise  that  the  block  of  four
“Eleusinian” hymns in our collection immediately follow this one.
Korybas, then, as an analogue of the murdered Dionysos, ends the theme of this god's
rebirth that is implicit in OH 31–38, which are addressed to figures who played a role in
this endeavor (and divinities subordinate to them), and which transitions to the central
section of the collection (see further OH 30i, OH 32i, OH 40i).
2 the warlike: This is an adjective used of Dionysos at OH 30.4 and of the Kouretes'
weapons at OH 38.1 and 7.
8 into the shape of a savage, dark dragon: The significance of this is obscure. It is
probably alluding to some myth now lost to us. Clement cites an anonymous poet
referring to the birth of Dionysos from Persephone and Zeus: “A bull, father of a
dragon [or: snake], and a father of a bull, a dragon [or: snake]; / in the mountain an
oxherd carries his secret goad” (Protrepticus 2.16.3). Note that Demeter's chariot is
drawn by dragons in the following hymn (see OH 40.14+n).
40. To Eleusinian Demeter
Demeter is the goddess of agriculture, specifically of cereals and their cultivation. She is
one of the “original six” Olympians born from Kronos and Rhea. However, as one of the
most important fertility goddesses in the Greek pantheon, she often is identified with
Earth herself. In antiquity, her name was commonly analyzed as “dē” (believed to have
been a variant of “gē,” “earth”) and “mētēr” (“mother”); Orphic fragment 399, for

example, addresses her as “Earth mother of all, Demeter, giver of prosperity and
wealth.” This identification extends to other fertility goddesses as well, such as Rhea and
Kybele (see OH 14i and OH 27i). It is reported that Orpheus himself supposedly
claimed Rhea was known as Demeter after the birth of Zeus, etymologizing the “dē”
element as related to the “di-” root in Zeus' name (Orphic fragment 206). Zeus mates
with her, and she gives birth to a daughter, Persephone, with whom she is closely
connected in cult. We find mention of this already in Hesiod Theogony 912–914. In
Orphic accounts of this union, Demeter, here equated with her mother Rhea, attempts
to flee the amorous attentions of her son Zeus by transforming herself into a snake.
Undeterred, Zeus does likewise, and from this was born Persephone, who has monstrous
features that frighten her mother away (see OH 14i). A similar story is found in Arkadia;
here, Demeter turns herself into a horse to escape Poseidon, who follows suit. Their
children are the Erinyes and the wonder horse Areion (see OH 69i). The ophidian rape
by Zeus has been diplomatically omitted from this hymn.
The most important myth concerning Demeter is the abduction of Persephone by
Hades, memorably told in the beautiful Homeric Hymn to Demeter. The story, however,
is not mentioned at all in this hymn but in the following one to Mother Antaia, another
name of Demeter, as well as in OH 18, OH 29 and OH 43. For details, see OH 41i. It is
notable that again, just as in the case of Zeus' rape of Demeter, the unpleasantness of
the abduction of Persephone is passed over in silence in this hymn.
The  account  of  Persephone's  abduction,  Demeter's  search  for  her,  and  their
consequent reunion formed the foundation myth of the Eleusinian Mysteries, which
were very old, perhaps performed in some form as far back as the bronze age. Eleusis is
a village that was originally independent of Athens but eventually became part of its
territory at some point before the seventh century. The cult was appropriated by the
Athenians, who in later times worked hard to give these local mysteries Panhellenic
importance, much like Delphi. In this they were quite successful. The mysteries were
very  popular  and  continued  unabated  until  officially  shut  down  by  the  emperor
Theodosius in 392 AD, although they were by then already largely neglected. For details
of the cult, see Burkert 1985, pp. 285–290, and Larson 2007, pp. 69–85, who also
discusses  other  cults  of  Demeter  and  Persephone.  The  Eleusinian  Mysteries  were
concerned with securing wealth and happiness in this life and a better fate in the
hereafter—concerns which we find also in Dionysian/Orphic mysteries, among others,
as well. Our hymn focuses exclusively on the material benefits of this life, and it radiates
a  joy  in  the  wealth  and  abundance  of  the  world,  which  may  help  to  explain  the
omissions  of  the  unsavory  mythological  elements  as  noted  above.  The  Eleusinian
Mysteries might also be specifically mentioned in our collection because they were felt
to have special connection with the actual cult in which the Hymns were in use. It is
notable that Mousaios had connections with the Mysteries; see OH Oi. Their prestige

might also be a factor in their appearance throughout the collection; compare their
possible  influence  on  the  early  development  of  the  Orphic  myth  of  Dionysos  in
Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 73–75. At any rate, the polytheistic nature of Greek religion
made such associations possible. One may be a member of many mystery religions, to
hedge one's bets as it were. On one of the Bacchic gold tablets, for example, the initiate
claims to “have the rites of Bacchos and Demeter Chthonia and the Mountain Mother”
(no. 28). Most likely some, if not all, of our initiates were members in other mystery
cults, too.
This hymn is the first of a group of four with Eleusinian themes. It comes in the
middle of the collection (in terms of number of lines), and it leads directly to the ritual
complex involving Dionysos (see OH 44i), which probably was the high point of the rite
during which these hymns were originally performed. It is perhaps not accidental that
Eleusinian Demeter receives the most elaborate request at the end of her hymn: peace,
law, wealth, and health. A number of hymns before this one mention three of these
items in their closing appeals (see OH 15i), and the only hymns that mention even two
of these afterward are OH 65 and OH 84.
1  Deo: This name of Demeter is usually understood by modern scholars to be a
shortened form of “Demeter,” although it is possible that it is just a by-form of the
“dē” element. Ancient scholars saw it as such and tried to attach it to words that
alluded to aspects of her mythology. For example, the author of the Derveni papyrus,
in his interpretation of a poem by Orpheus, asserts that the “dē” is derived from a
Greek verb meaning “to tear, to cut up” and explains that Zeus injured the goddess
during intercourse, something which he reports that Orpheus “makes clear” later in
the poem he was reading (see Betegh 2004, pp. 189–190; the Derveni author might
be giving an allegorical meaning to an explicit mention of plowing).
2 nurturer of youths: This epithet is applied to other divinities in our collection:
Hekate (OH 1.8), Artemis (OH 36.8), and Eirene (Peace) in the hymn to Ares (OH
65.9; cf. OH 12.8 and OH 19.22). As the hymn to Ares makes clear, peace and
agriculture are closely linked, for when there is no war, men turn their swords to
ploughshares; compare lines 4 and 19 of this hymn. Demeter may also be seen as a
nurturer of youths insofar as she was nurse to Demophoön and tried to make him
immortal (Homeric Hymn to Demeter 2.98–255). This same epithet recurs in line 13.
8–9: Those who were the first to do something were held in high regard by the ancient
Greeks, who did not hesitate to invent such figures and/or give credit to the gods
when no historical personage was at hand. Here Demeter is lauded as the first to
create crops and the first to develop the technical means to harvest them. In respect
to the latter, she fits the pattern of the culture hero, the one whose innovations pave

the way for the development and improvement of human civilization; cf. OH 38.6+n
and OH 76.7+n, where the Kouretes and the Muses respectively teach mortals the
sacred rituals (as does Demeter in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter 2.473–482). The
most famous divine culture hero in myth is probably Prometheus (see, for example,
Aeschylus Prometheus Bound 436–506, and cf. OH 28i and OH 66i). Demeter is said
to have taught the Eleusinian prince Triptolemos the secrets of agriculture, and he in
turn traveled the world to teach his fellow man. We find Demeter linked to plowing
in Hesiod's injunction to his brother to pray to Demeter and Chthonian Zeus right
before beginning to plow (Works and Days 465–469). Another early connection
between the goddess and agricultural technique is found in a Homeric simile where
Demeter is shown separating grain from chaff (Iliad 5.499–502).
10  Bromios:  Another  name  for  Dionysos;  the  name  means  the  “roarer”  (cf. OH
30.1+n). This god becomes associated with Demeter at Eleusis through Iacchos, who
seems to be a personified form of the cry the sacred procession would shout out on
their way to Eleusis; see OH 42.4+n.
11 torch-bearing and pure: Torches are typical staples in the process of celebrating
fertility divinities, who often have their festivities celebrated at night, including
Dionysian revels (see OH 52i and OH 54.10). They were an important part of the
Eleusinian cult, as might be deduced from the title of one of its highest functionaries,
the Dadoukhos (a word meaning “torch-bearer”); see OH 42.4n. Demeter carries a
torch while fasting and in search of her daughter (Homeric Hymn to Demeter 2.47–
50, 59–63), and Artemis-Persephone is called Torch-Bearer” (see OH 36.3n). See
further OH 9.3n. Purity is a general concern in Greek religion but especially in
matters  such  as  initiations.  For  example,  potential  initiates  in  the  Eleusinian
Mysteries needed to bathe themselves in the sea along with the pig they were to
sacrifice. Both these adjectives, then, are as much descriptive of our initiates as they
are of the goddess herself. See also OH 30.4+n.
14: A different kind of yoking than mentioned in line 8. Triptolemos is often portrayed
in a winged chariot, bringing the knowledge of Demeter to all (see Boardman 1991,
p. 219, Boardman 1975, p. 226, and Boardman 1989, p. 226). The dragons here are
symbolic of Demeter's chthonic connection; compare line 12 where the goddess is
addressed as appearing from beneath the earth. Demeter Chthonia (Demeter From
Beneath the Earth) was in fact worshipped at Hermione (see Larson 2007, pp. 78–
79). The dragons might also have a connection with Korybas, who in the previous
hymn was said to have taken the form of a dragon in accordance with “Deo's
thinking” (lines 7–8), an obscure allusion.
15: Demeter is here described in maenadic terms; see OH 1.3n. The throne might be

referring to Kybele's throne (see OH 27.5+9n). The circular movement perhaps
symbolizes the revolution of the celestial bodies around the earth (see OH 4.3n).
16 only daughter ... many children: The contrasting juxtaposition is typical of our
poet's style, but the reference here is somewhat puzzling. Persephone is usually her
only child in myth, but Demeter sometimes is said to have children beside her. In an
early myth, she has as a lover the mortal hero Iasion, with whom she lies in a thrice-
plowed field. From this union she gives birth to Ploutos (Wealth; see OH 18i), but
Iasion is killed by Zeus (Hesiod Theogony 969–974 and Odyssey 5.125–128; see also
Homeric Hymn to Demeter 2.488–489). Herodotos mentions that Aeschylus (in a
play now lost to us) made Artemis the daughter of Demeter on the basis of an
Egyptian tale (2.156.5–6); the historian, however, is skeptical of this last detail.
Kallimakhos says that Hekate was the daughter of Demeter (fragment 466; see
Orphic fragment 400). Since Artemis and Hekate eventually are identified as the
same goddess, it is possible that both births point to one original account, perhaps
Orphic. They both might have already been identified with Persephone, too (see OH
29i). However, in our collection Persephone is explicitly said to be Demeter's only
daughter (OH 29.1–2). It is difficult, though not impossible, to construe “many” to
just  mean  Persephone-Artemis-Hekate  and  Ploutos.  On  the  other  hand,  “many
children” may be symbolic insofar as Demeter is viewed as a nurturer of children
(see lines 2 and 13) or it may be used in the sense that the crops she sends up are
“her children.” The attribute “only daughter” is even more puzzling, as she has two
sisters, Hestia and Hera, in conventional mythology. But Demeter was equated with
Hestia and Hera in early Orphic thought (see OH 14i and Betegh 2004, p. 222), and
our composer might have in mind Demeter as the personification of female fertility
in these lines; this gains some support from the general description of her powers in
line 17 and the “many children” in line 16, if we are to understand this attribute
broadly.
18–20: The repetitions augment the sense of religious fervor and insistence as the hymn
closes with a mighty crescendo. The theme running throughout the hymn, that
Demeter is a goddess who brings benefits that contribute to the well-being of both
the individual and society, is neatly summarized in these lines. The word “riches” is a
translation of the Greek “ploutos,” which alludes to her son Ploutos (see note to line
16 above). Peace and rule of law might be intended as personifications of two of the
Seasons, Eirene and Eunomia respectively (see OH 43i), and perhaps health should
be personified as well (Hygeia), the addressee of OH 68; see also OH 15.10–11n.
41. To Mother Antaia

Mother  Antaia  is  here  another  name  for  Demeter.  The  mythological  complex
surrounding the abduction of Persephone, absent in the previous hymn, is the focus of
this one. Indeed, one of the remarkable features about the hymn is that more than half
of  it  is  narrative,  a  departure  from  the  usual  aggregation  of  epithets,  names,  and
description.
The Homeric Hymn  to  Demeter contains the most famous version of the myth.
Demeter fasts in grief after her daughter's disappearance, although she does not know
yet that Hades has abducted her. Hekate comes to assist her, and they find out from Sun
what has happened. Depressed, Demeter wanders the world disguised as an old woman
(cf. also OH 74i). She eventually reaches Eleusis and becomes a nurse to Demophoön,
the newly born son of the king of Eleusis. The baby becomes a kind of surrogate child
for the goddess. The mother one night sees the nurse putting her son in the fire and cries
out, not knowing that Demeter had intended to make him immortal. In anger Demeter
leaves but not before ordering that a temple be built in her honor and promising to
introduce rites in Eleusis later. For now, she keeps apart from the gods and causes a
great famine with the intent to wipe out the human race and thus deprive the gods of the
sacrifices they so very much crave. Hades is willing to let Persephone return, but she
has already tasted of the pomegranate seeds he had given to her. Therefore she cannot
remain permanently in the land of the living. For the one part of the year she must
remain in the underworld with her husband; during this time Demeter grieves over her
daughter and nothing grows. However, during the other two parts of the year, she is
reunited with her daughter, and in her joy life flourishes anew. Thus the myth explains
the origins of the seasons, which the ancient Greeks generally numbered three (see OH
29i). At the end of the poem, Demeter returns to the plains of Rharion outside of
Eleusis. She restores the crops and teaches her mysteries, as she had promised, to the
princes of Eleusis. There are a number of allusions to this story that are sequentially
spread over a number of hymns in the collection; see OH 43i. For a similar story
involving Kybele, see OH 27i. The abduction of Persephone and the wanderings of
Demeter were the subject of at least one poem attributed to Orpheus (collected under
Orphic fragment 379–402; see Richardson 1974, pp. 77–86, for a discussion of the
versions  of  Orpheus,  Mousaios,  and  Eumolpos).  Relevant  details  are  in  the  notes
passim.
1 Antaia: The word is properly an adjective with the base meaning of “opposite” and
further specialized senses of “hostile” and “besought with prayers.” As an adjective it
is used of Kybele in Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika 1.1141. Later grammarians
say that it was also used as a proper name for Rhea and Hekate. It is therefore not
surprising  to  see  Demeter  called  by  this  name.  Both  the  negative  and  positive
connotations of the word are probably intended in this hymn. The goddess was once

hostile to men; now they shower her with prayers, as this hymn does.
1–2 mother/of immortal gods and of mortal men: Similarly described are Rhea (OH
14.8–9), Earth (OH 26.1), and Kybele (OH 27.7); see also OH 10.1+n.
4: In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter 2.192–211, after the disguised Demeter agrees to
be a nurse for Demophoön, she comes to Eleusis. She stands brooding in the palace
until an old woman, Iambe, offers her a stool covered with a white fleece. Demeter
sits but says nothing until Iambe tells her jokes that make her laugh. She refuses wine
from the queen but asks instead that they make for her a drink made of water,
barley-meal, and pennyroyal. It is with this that she breaks her fast. The drink,
known as the kukeon, was also imbibed by initiates at the Eleusinian Mysteries. In
the Orphic version(s), Iambe does not appear, but instead we find a woman named
Baubo, a native Eleusinian, who gets the mourning mother to laugh by exposing her
pudenda and who then offers her the kukeon that Demeter had earlier refused
(Clement of Alexandria Protrepticus 2.20.3–21.1; Orphic fragment 394–395).
5–7: In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, it is not the goddess but rather Hermes who goes
into the underworld to fetch Persephone. Dysaules is the husband to Baubo (see the
note to line 4 above). Pausanias reports that the Phliasians claim that he was the
brother to Keleos (king of Eleusis in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter), that he came to
them after being expelled by an Athenian, and that he taught them the mysteries
(2.14.2).  Pausanias  is  skeptical  of  the  story,  remarking  that  Dysaules  is  not
mentioned among the group instructed by Demeter in her Homeric hymn and citing
lines 2.474–476, but he admits that Dysaules might have arrived due to some other
reason (2.14.3). In the Orphic version, Dysaules' sons Triptolemos and Eubouleus
inform  Demeter  of  the  abduction  of  Persephone,  and  she  teaches  them  the
knowledge of agriculture as a reward (Pausanias 1.14.3). Clement of Alexandria tells
us that Triptolemos was a cowherd and Eubouleus a swineherd and that the swine of
Eubouleus fell into the earth during the abduction of Persephone (Protrepticus 2.20.and 2.17.1; see Orphic fragment 390–391). The latter is adduced to explain the
custom in the Thesmophoria, a festival in honor of Demeter and Persephone, of
women throwing pigs in a pit and later taking back the rotting corpse (see Larson
2007, p. 70), which would seem to be symbolic of Persephone's (and Demeter's?)
journey. It is likely that Eubouleus is the one to whom the “innocent child of
Dysaules” refers in this hymn. At Eleusis, there was a god named Eubouleus who
was considered to have brought Persephone back up from the underworld, much like
Hermes does in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter.
8: A problematic line. As it stands, Euboulos might be a vague reference to Ploutos, the
son of Demeter and Iasion (see OH 40.16n), or to the Kretan grandfather of the

goddess  Diktynna  (another  name  of  Artemis;  see  note  to OH  36.3n),  whom
Diodorus Siculus calls the son of Demeter (5.76.3). Elsewhere in the collection,
Hades is called Euboulos (OH 18.12). The name might be an alternate form of
Eubouleus, but it cannot refer to the one mentioned in the previous line. Eubouleus is
also used of gods: Hades, Zeus, Dionysos, and Protogonos (see OH 6i). None would
fit the context, however. This led Theiler to suggest changing the Greek verb “bore”
to “made”: the sense then would be that Demeter changed Eubouleus (who had
helped her find and retrieve Persephone) into a god, and thus he was no longer
bound by human needs. This would fit in neatly with the story of Demophoön in the
Homeric Hymn to Demeter and with the fact that there was a god Eubouleus at
Eleusis (see note to lines 5–7 above). Note, too, that on some Bacchic gold tablets it
is claimed that the initiate will become a god (nos. 3, 5, 9; see OH 87.12n). A third
possibility is that something has fallen out between lines 7 and 8. The “you” might
then be someone else, such as Persephone.
42. To Mise
Mise is an obscure goddess who appears to be connected with Demeter and Eleusis. She
is mentioned in a poem by Herodas, in which a character sees a girl at a “Descent of
Mise,” a cultic context that suggests a journey to the underworld (Mimiamb 1.56). In the
lexicon of Hesykhios, she is connected with Meter and said to be invoked in oaths
(entry M 1442). The name might appear in an account attributed to Asklepiades of
Tragilos (fourth century BC) by Harpocration (see Orphic fragment 391), who says that
the Eleusinian pair Dysaules and Baubo had two daughters, Protonoe and Nisa, the latter
name possibly a corruption of “Misa,” which would be another form of “Mise.” Two
inscriptions have been discovered bearing the name. One was found in the precinct of
Demeter in Pergamon, the other on an altar dedicated by a priestess to “Mise Kore”
near Pergamon. For a review of the evidence and interpretation, see Ricciardelli 2000,
pp. 398–400 and Morand 2001, pp. 169–174. In this hymn, Mise is identified with
Dionysos and seems to be a reflection of the female side of the god who elsewhere
appears androgynous (see note to line 4). Whether they are considered distinct or the
same is difficult to determine. The Eleusinian connection is strong in the beginning
portion of the hymn: the epithet “law-giving” in line 1 is also a cultic title of Demeter
and Persephone, Iacchos was the name of a god chanted by the sacred procession to
Eleusis (see note to line 4), and Eleusis is the first place mentioned in the list found in
lines 5–10. The three goddesses mentioned in lines 6–10 are all connected with a young
boy who dies and is reborn: Meter and Attis (see OH 27i), Aphrodite and Adonis (see
OH 56i), and Isis and Osiris, who already in the Classical period was identified with

Dionysos (Herodotos 2.144; see also Diodorus Siculus 1.13.5 and 1.22.7–23.8 and
Plutarch De Iside et Osiride 364e ff.). For the identification of Isis with Aphrodite,
Meter, Demeter, and other goddesses, see OH 55.15–28n.
1 fennel stalk
: A reference to the thyrsos; see OH 45.5n.
2 unforgettable and many-named seed: See also OH 50.2+n.
4 Iacchos: Participants in the Eleusinian Mysteries would walk from Athens to Eleusis
at night by torchlight with song, dance, and bawdy banter; see OH 40.11n. The god
invoked was Iacchos, who seems to be a personification of the cry “iakkhe!” This
god was identified with Dionysos; see Sophokles Antigone 1146–1152. The chorus
of initiates calls on Iacchos in their procession in Aristophanes Frogs 340–353 and
372–416, and a ghost procession is supposed to have materialized during the Persian
Wars as a sign of the eventual disaster of the Persian campaign (Herodotos 8.65).
The name Iacchos appears in the Eleusinian myth in which Baubo exposes her
genitals to the mourning Demeter (Orphic fragment 395 and see OH 41.4n), where
there  probably  was  a  pun  on  “iakkhos”  (“female  genitalia”)  and  Iacchos,  who
sometimes is regarded as the child of Demeter; see Graf 1974, pp. 194–199. Iacchos
also played a role in the Lenaia, an Athenian festival (see OH 50i). For the androgyny
of Dionysos, see OH 30.2n; for a list of androgynous deities in the Hymns, see OH
9.4n.
6 mystic rites in Phrygia: Compare OH 49.2–3 where Hipta, a nurse of Dionysos, is
said to take part in the mysteries of Sabos and the dances of Iacchos.
9–10 your divine mother, / ... black-robed Isis: The epithet “black-robed” is used of
the goddess in the third hymn to Isis by Isidoros (3.34); see Vanderlip 1972, p. 62.
For Isis as the mother of Dionysos, see Plutarch De Iside et Osiride 365e–f.
10 train of nurses: A reference to the Nymphs who took the infant Dionysos after the
death of Semele; see OH 46.2–3n.
11 contests: The Stars, too, are asked to come to the “learned contests of this sacred
rite”; see OH 7.12+12–13n.
43. To the Seasons
The Seasons (Greek Horai), as their name suggests, are the personifications of the
seasons. This hymn adopts the Hesiodic genealogy (Theogony 901–903) that makes
them the daughters of Zeus and Themis (“established custom” or “law”), and, like their
mother, they represent an aspect of the cosmic order (see further OH 79i). For Homer,

these divinities are in charge of access to Olympos (Iliad 5.748–751) and in one scene
take care of the horses of Hera and Athene when they return (Iliad 8.432–435). The
Orphic Rhapsodies follow Hesiod with respect to the birth and names of the Seasons
(Orphic  fragment  252).  Their  names  mean  “law-abiding”  (“eunomia”),  “justice”
(“dike”), and “peace” (“eirene”). Dike has her own hymn (OH 62), Eunomia is the
mother of the Graces (OH 60.2), and both Eunomia and Eirene are summoned, though
not personified, at the end of the hymn to Eleusinian Demeter (OH 40.19; but see OH
40.18–20n). According to Pausanias (9.35.2), however, at Athens there were only two
Seasons worshipped, whose names were Karpo (Fruit) and Thallo (Blossom). The
Seasons do not merely embody the seasons but also come to represent youthful feminine
beauty as well. They clothe Aphrodite when she emerges from the sea and adorn her
with numerous ornaments (Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite 6.5–18), and they crown the
newly-fashioned Pandora with a garland of spring flowers (Hesiod Works and Days 74–
75). This connection with spring and flowers is emphasized in this hymn, which fits the
context of fertility introduced with Eleusinian Demeter (OH 40).
The Seasons are also linked with the myth of Persephone's abduction and return in
our collection. The entire story is scattered over several hymns, but nevertheless the
chronological order is maintained; in performing the hymns, the initiates recreate the
myth  piecemeal.  The  abduction  portion  appears  in  two  earlier  hymns:  the  one  to
Plouton, where there is brief narration (OH 18.12–15), and the one to Persephone (OH
29.14). The next part, Demeter's search and recovery of her daughter, again with short
narration, is told in the hymn to Mother Antaia (OH 41.3–7). Now in this hymn, the
cycle is completed. Every year, Persephone's reappearance in the land of the living
heralds the beginning of spring, the season of growth. It is not surprising, then, to see
the personifications of spring dancing with her in celebration of the return of life (see
also OH 29.9–13); note in particular the “circling dances” and “come forth to the light”
in line  and that their dancing pleases “Zeus and their mother, giver of fruits” in line 9.
“Their mother” refers to Themis, who rejoices that the cosmic order, manifested in the
cycle of seasons, is maintained. The idea of renewal is also important to Dionysos, the
focus of the previous hymn, both because he is a fertility god himself and also because
he was reborn, just like his mother Persephone (albeit metaphorically). In this context,
the invocation at the end of the hymn that the goddesses appear to the new initiates has
special point. They, too, are being “born again” into a new life (see OH 30i). It also
segues  into  the  theme  of  birth,  which  had  appeared  in  the  earlier  hymns  of  the
collection and which will dominate OH 44–55 (see OH 44i).
The Fates, too, join the festivities. They do so not only because they are the (half-
)sisters of the Seasons (see OH 59i) but also because they have a natural interest in the
cosmic order as well. The seasons recur as they are fated to do so. We find the Seasons
and Fates linked in cultic contexts. In the precinct of Zeus at Athens, Pausanias saw an

unfinished statue of the god with both groups above his head (1.40.4). On the altar at
Amyklai they were depicted next to Demeter, Persephone, and Plouton, along with
Aphrodite, Athene, and Artemis (Pausanias 3.19.4).
The Graces naturally take part in the dance as well. They are very similar to the
Seasons in that they, too, are a plurality of three young women who are paradigmatic of
feminine beauty and charm (see OH 60i). They join the Seasons in adorning Pandora
(Hesiod Works and Days 73–74). In perhaps one of the most beautiful scenes from
ancient Greek literature, both groups dance in a circle with Hebe, Harmonia, and
Aphrodite. In their midst Artemis sings. Ares and Hermes play along with them. And all
of this is in tune with the glorious music of Apollon as he expertly plays the lyre
(Homeric Hymn  to  Apollon  3.186–206).  Our  composer  has  skillfully  captured  the
essence of this joie de vivre and grafted it to a genuine religious awe before the uncanny
powers of fertility. It is a fitting coda to the block of four hymns with Eleusinian
themes.
44. To Semele
Semele is one of the daughters of Kadmos, the founder of Thebes. Zeus falls in love
with  her,  and  they  begin  to  have  an  affair.  Eventually  Semele,  sometimes  at  the
instigation  of  a  disguised  and  jealous  Hera,  secures  an  oath  from  Zeus  and  then
demands that he appear to her as he does to his wife. Thus constrained, Zeus reluctantly
complies; he reveals himself to the mortal woman in his full stature as god of thunder
and lightning. The resulting fireworks burn Semele to a crisp. Zeus notices that she was
pregnant, and he decides to save the unborn child. He sews it up in his thigh, and, once
it reaches full maturity, Zeus gives “birth” to his son, Dionysos; see Euripides Bacchae
1–42, Apollodoros 3.4.3, Ovid Metamorphoses 3.257–313, Orphic fragment 328, and
OH 48.3+n and OH 50.3+n. Sometimes Dionysos is given to Semele's sister, Ino, to
nurse, and she in turn is further pursued by Hera (see OH 74i); in other versions, baby
Dionysos is given to his half-brother Hermes, who hands the child off to the Nymphs in
the East to rear (see OH 51i), sometimes with Silenos (see OH 54.1+n). For the nurse
Hipta, see OH 49i. Semele is already mentioned as the mother of Dionysos by Homer
(Iliad 14.325), by Hesiod (Theogony 940–942), and in the three Homeric hymns to
Dionysos (1.21, 7.1, 26.2). An alternate name for her is Thyone (Homeric Hymn to
Dionysos  1.21,  Sappho  fragment  17,  Apollodoros  3.5.3).  The  Orphics  offered  a
different version, namely that Dionysos, sometimes called Zagreus, was the son of Zeus
and Persephone (see OH 29i), but some accounts attempt to retain the traditional
genealogy; for a reconstruction of how and why this was done, see Graf/Johnston 2007,
pp. 74–80. In one of these versions, after Dionysos is killed by the Titans, Athene saves

his heart and brings it to Zeus; he promptly cuts it up, makes a little soup out of it, and
feeds it to Semele, who then is impregnated and gives birth to Dionysos; see Orphic
fragment 314–316 and 327, Proclus Hymn to Athene Polymetis 7.7–15 (translation and
commentary in van den Berg 2001, pp. 277 and 287–293), West 1983, pp. 162–163,
and Graf/Johnston 2007, p. 78. In our collection, both Semele and Persephone are
called the mother of Dionysos, but in one case it is implied that Persephone received
Dionysos to rear after he was born (presumably by Semele; see OH 46.6–7+n, and cf.
OH 30.2+n).
This hymn begins a series (through OH 54) whose focus is on Dionysos; in particular,
these hymns are linked by the motif of (re)birth, a theme that is prevalent at the
beginning of the collection (see OH 2i). A number of them refer to ritual contexts and,
insofar as the hymns are performative acts (see OH 30i), probably reflect something of
the actual activities of our cult during this particular rite, though details are vague; see
lines –9 and note.
3 thyrsos-bearing: A typical attribute of Dionysos and his followers; see OH 45.5+n.
6–9: There is a tradition that Dionysos descended into the underworld to retrieve his
mother and convey her to Olympos (Pausanias 2.37.5; cf. Pindar Olympian Odes
2.25–28 and the comic parody in Aristophanes Frogs, in which Dionysos goes to
fetch  the  recently-departed  playwright  Euripides).  Here,  though,  it  seems  that
Persephone has received her kindly in the underworld. Semele might originally have
been an earth goddess, and these lines might be an indirect remnant of this tradition.
The “ritual of the table” is obscure. Perhaps it is related to the myth mentioned in the
introduction to the hymn that has Zeus feeding Semele Dionysos-soup. Note the
phrase “all mortal men reenact your travail,” which of course suggests birth, and it
would certainly be easier for a worshipper to drink soup in a ritual context than to be
set on fire (see also OH 47.5n). The idea of ingesting the god is already bound
together with his role as god of wine and the concept of enthousiasmos (see OH 30i).
See also Graf/Johnston 2007, p. 156.
45. Hymn to Dionysos Bassareus and Triennial
Dionysos is already the addressee of OH 30, but this hymn is the first of a series
dedicated to a specific cultic identity of Dionysos. Here he is invoked as Bassareus and
Triennial; cf. OH 52, which is addressed to Triennial and which mentions Bassaros in
line  12,  a  variant  of  Bassareus.  This  epithet  is  derived  from  the  Thracian  word
“bassara,” “fox” and, by extension, the fox-skin worn at times by the god and his
maenads. Thracian maenads could be called Bassarids, and a lost play by Aeschylus

bears  their  name  as  a  title.  In  this  play,  it  seems  they  tear  apart  Orpheus,  who,
incidentally, is their countryman. The violence mentioned in our hymn might very well
have been influenced by this play, although by now the violent death of Orpheus had
become a literary standard. In any case, it is possible that the Thracian connection
induced our poet to include a hymn addressed to Dionysos Bassareus. Bassarids are first
mentioned by Anakreon (PMG 411b), who also uses a related verb, “anabassareō,” to
indicate reveling at a symposium (PMG 356a). This hymn continues the birth theme
(see OH 44i) and alludes to maenadic ritual in lines –5. It is not difficult to conceive a
period of joyous shouting, dancing, and brandishing of thyrsi (perhaps limited to the
female initiates, if there were any) that was intended to be symbolic at the rite when this
hymn was performed; see also OH 52i and OH 54i.
1 bull-faced god conceived in fire: For Dionysos' relationship to bulls, see OH 30.3–
4+n. “Conceived in fire” would appear to refer to his traditional birth from Semele
(see OH 44i and OH 30.2n).
2 many-named: For a list of the names used of Dionysos in the collection, see OH
50.2n.
3 bloody swords: Not a weapon normally associated with Dionysos. Plutarch tells us of
a rite in which women who represented the Minyads, the daughters of Minyas who
had rejected Dionysos (see note to line 5, “wrathful in the extreme”), were pursued
by a priest armed with a sword (Quaestiones  graecae 299c–300a). There are a
number of Attic vases from the first half of the fifth century BC that portray Orpheus
being killed by Thracian women who wield all sorts of weapons, including swords
(see Bundrick 2005, pp. 116–126). The violence of the god is further alluded to in
line 5. See also OH 30.4+n (“warlike”).
3 holy Maenads: See the introduction to this hymn.
4: For a picture of Olympians celebrating Bacchic frenzy, see Pindar fragment 70b.6–
21. Loudness is a characteristic of Dionysos and his worship; see OH 30.1+n.
5 thyrsos: The thyrsos is a wand topped with a pine cone that is sometimes wrapped in
ivy. The shaft can be made from the fennel stalk; see OH 42.1 and Euripides
Bacchae 147. It is one of the most widespread attributes of Dionysian worship,
frequently mentioned in literature and often depicted in iconography. In the context
of discussing initiation, Plato gives a prose quotation vaguely attributed to “the
followers of the mysteries” that “the fennel-stalk bearers [narthēkophoroi] are many,
the bacchoi few” (Phaedo 69c = Orphic fragment 576), which seems to point to a
distinction  between  general  worship  of  Dionysos  (maenadism?)  and  the  more
restricted mystery cults that require initiation, such as the Eleusinian Mysteries (see

also Graf/Johnston 2007, p. 143). The thyrsos is sometimes used as a weapon, e.g.,
by Dionysos in the Gigantomachy or by a maenad repelling the licentious advances
of a satyr in vase paintings (e.g., Boardman 1975, pl. 313). See also OH 44.3, OH
50.8, and OH 52.4.
5  wrathful  in  the  extreme:  Examples  of  Dionysos'  wrath  abound  in  mythology,
particularly in a group of myths that involve the rejection of his worship. Some of
the  more  famous  victims  include  Lykourgos,  the  Thracian  king  who  hounded
Dionysos and his maenads (Iliad 6.130–140), Pentheus and the women of Thebes
(Euripides Bacchae), the daughters of Minyas, who eschewed going to the mountains
to worship the god (Ovid Metamorphoses 4.1–40 and 390–415; also see the Plutarch
citation in note to line 3), and the daughters of Proitos, who in some versions of their
story also refuse Dionysos (Apollodoros 2.2.2). Orpheus himself experienced the
god's wrath after rejecting him, being ripped apart (sparagmos) by maenads and/or
the Bassarids (see OH 52i). See also OH 30.4+n and OH 47i.
7  leaping  god:  Leaping,  frolicking,  gamboling,  prancing—all  these  are  typical
expressions  of  abandon  in  ecstatic  cult;  Dionysos  himself  often  leads  the  wild
processionals (see, e.g., OH 52.3–4 and 7–8). Other related figures described in
similar terms are Pan (OH 11.4), the Nereids (OH 24.7), the Kouretes (OH 31.1),
and the Nymphs with Pan (OH 51.8). Note that all of these are groups, save Pan,
who, like Dionysos, can function as chorus-leader. The leaping may have fertility
connotations like the “leaping” in the Palaikastro hymn to Zeus does (see OH 31i).
Dionysos is called the “dancer” at OH O.8, and his “feet quiver in the dance” at OH
46.4.
46. To Liknites
This hymn is addressed to Dionysos Liknites (Dionysos of the cradle), who is also
mentioned in OH 52.3. The title “Liknites” comes from the Greek word “liknon,” the
primary meaning of which is “winnowing-fan.” This was a common cult object in
Dionysian mysteries, well-attested in vase paintings (e.g., Boardman 1989, pl. 233) and
often containing a phallus; see Graf/Johnston 2007, p. 148, and compare the story of
Korybas' murder (OH 39i). There are hints in later writers of a story in which the
goddess Hipta places a winnowing fan on her head, wreathes it with a snake, and
receives the infant Dionysos in it after he is born from Zeus' thigh (Orphic fragment
329); this coheres with her role as nurse of Dionysos in our collection (see OH 49.1).
An enigmatic vase painting from the Classical period might be depicting a variant of
this account (Boardman 1989, pl. 157; for discussion, see Loucas 1992); here, a woman

(Hipta?) is bearing a covered winnowing-basket to two seated gods, who might be
Sabazios and Kybele (see also OH 49i).
Dionysos was worshipped as Liknites at Delphi, and Plutarch tells us that it was
believed his remains had been brought there (De Iside et Osiride 365a). This dovetails
with one version of the Orphic myth of the Titans' dismemberment of Dionysos where
it is Apollon who gathers the remains of his half-brother and buries them on Parnassos
(Orphic fragment 322). Plutarch further says that the Holy Ones perform a secret
sacrifice in Apollon's temple when Liknites is awakened by the Thyiads, a group of
Attic women who performed maenadic rituals for Dionysos every other year on the
slopes of Parnassos (see OH 52i and OH 53i; see further Plutarch Mulierum virtutes
249e–f and De primo frigido 953d). Dionysos was the most important deity at Delphi
for three months in the winter, when Apollon was thought to be vacationing up north
among the Hyperboreans. There is also some obscure testimony that Dionysos was at
Delphi before Apollon, perhaps even identified with Python, the serpent Apollon kills
(for  Python,  see OH  34.3n;  for  the  identification  of  Dionysos  and  Python,  see
Fontenrose 1959, pp. 374–379). For more information on the worship of Dionysos at
Delphi, see West 1983, pp. 150–152, and Larson 2007, pp. 137–138; cf. also OH 79.7–
10n. Our hymn does not appear to refer explicitly to the Delphic Liknites, but for the
sleeping Dionysos, see OH 53.2–3+i. The theme of birth continues in this hymn. It also
adds the notion of vegetation (“blossoming” in line ), which is further developed in
some of the following hymns, thus highlighting Dionysos' connection with plant-life (see
further OH 50i). There is no explicit mention of a ritual, but the name itself implies one,
and it can easily be imagined that at this stage of the rite a winnowing-basket was
brought in and/or its contents revealed (see OH 47i).
2–3:  The  Nymphs  rear  Dionysos  already  in  Homer  (Iliad  6.132)  and  are  found
throughout the collection in this capacity (see OH 30.8n). Apollonios of Rhodes
recounts that a specific nymph, Makris, received the infant Dionysos (Argonautika
4.540 and 1131–1140). For other nurslings of nymphs, see OH 51.3n. Hipta, too, is
called the “nurse of Bacchos” (OH 49.1), while sometimes it is his aunt Ino, among
others, who rears the child after her sister perishes (see OH 44i). Nysa is the name of
a number of mountains in Asia Minor, and it is where Dionysos is often said to have
been reared by the Nymphs; see the two shorter Homeric hymns to Dionysos (1.6–9,
where Nysa is situated in Egypt [cf. Herodotos 2.146.2]) and 26.3–9, as well as
Apollodoros 3.4.3 and OH 51.15. Its appearance here stresses Dionysos' Eastern
associations, as do Sabazios and Hipta, the addressees of the two hymns after the
next, respectively; note, too, that a winnowing basket seems to have been a part of
Sabazios' mysteries, at least in Athens (see OH 48i). In ancient etymologies Nysa was
used to explain Dionysos' name (for a somewhat technical discussion, see West

1978, pp. 373–375, with further references). The Homeric Hymn to Demeter locates
the abduction of Persephone in the Nysian field (2.17) but gives no indication where
this field might be in the world. The mention of Aphrodite suggests an identification
with Adonis; see further note to lines 6–7.
4 quiver in the dance: For Dionysos as a dancing god, see OH 45.7n and OH 52i.
5: Compare the short Homeric Hymn to Dionysos (no. 26) and see OH 51.15–16n.
6–7: Persephone is often the mother of Dionysos in Orphic mythology, but here she is
the ultimate nurse of the child Dionysos, just as she is the nurse of Aprhodite's son
Adonis (compare line 3 and see OH 56i). This would seem to contradict other hymns
in the collection where she is explicitly the mother of Dionysos (e.g., OH 30.6–7),
and it is possible that we have a vague reference to a tradition that retained Semele as
the  conventional  mother  of  Dionysos  and  worked  in  Persephone  as  his  most
important nurse. For the problem of reconciling the birth of Dionysos from both
Semele and Persephone in Orphism, see OH 30.2n and OH 44i.
7 loved by the deathless gods: The manuscripts have “feared” instead of “loved,”
which is odd since Dionysos quickly became an accepted member of the Olympic
pantheon (e.g., for fetching Hephaistos; see OH 66i). If “feared” should be retained,
perhaps comparable is Alexander's mother, Olympias, who scared men with tamed
snakes coming out of winnowing-baskets (Plutarch Alexander 2.9); compare Pan's
birth (OH 11i). On the other hand, this idea of fear might just be a generic reference
to the kind of horror Dionysos can effect (as at the end of Euripides' Bacchae);
compare the “bloody swords” and “wrathful to the extreme” in OH 45.3 and 5.
47. To Perikionios
This hymn, like the previous one, is addressed to Dionysos in one of his particular ritual
manifestations, albeit one rather obscure to us. “Perikionios” means “twined round the
pillar,”  and  the  only  reference  to  this  title  comes  from  a  scholiast  to  Euripides
Phoenician Women 651, who cites the late third- or early second-century historian
Mnaseas (fragment 18). The brief notice states that after the palace of Kadmos had
been blasted by Zeus' lightning, ivy enveloped it to protect the infant therein; thus
Dionysos was called Perikionios among the Thebans. Our poet might very well have had
something like this in mind, especially if it is Dionysos who causes the ivy to cover the
palace in the original myth (cf. line 2). It is possible that some confusion has occurred;
our composer might have been influenced inadvertently by the story of Dionysos and
the pirates, where as part of his epiphany ivy covers the sail and mast of their ship

(Homeric Hymn to Dionysos 7.38–42). The far distance of our cult from Thebes could
have facilitated such a misunderstanding. Perhaps related is Pausanias' account of the
Thebans' claim that after Semele had been struck by the thunderbolt, a log fell down
from heaven and that subsequently a certain Polydoros (Semele's brother in some
sources) decked it out in bronze and called it Dionysos Kadmeios (9.12.3). This is
Theban cult, but a number of Athenain vase paintings show a pole or column outdoors
on which is affixed a mask of Dionysos (bearded) with other accoutrements (e.g.,
Boardman 1989, pl. 24). There are scenes of women around it handling wine or dancing
wildly (sometimes with satyrs); see Larson 2007, p. 135. One in particular might have
some (albeit indirect) relevance for our collection. On one side the mask of Dionysos
lies in a liknon among ivy with two women standing around, one carrying a basket of
fruit, the other a wine decanter (see Boardman 1989, pl. 233). This probably represents
the  stage  before  the  mask  is  ritually  affixed  to  the  column.  It  is  perhaps  not  a
coincidence, then, that this hymn follows the one addressed to Dionysos Liknites and
part of the rite performed by our initiates might have consisted of a mask of Dionysos
being carried to a column, accompanied by the initiates' singing the previous hymn to
Liknites, and then the incense offering being given as this hymn was sung. That is not to
say that our cult had preserved a centuries-old form of worship unchanged. It is more
likely that certain types of Dionysian worship were adopted and adapted in Orphic (and
other) circles (compare the notion of the bricoleur in Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 70–and passim; cf. also OH 4i). It is also a possibility that a rite might have been invented
or an older one altered in later times on the basis of literary sources (see note to line )
or under the influence of a local indigenous cult through an identification with a
Hellenic divinity. Regardless of how the rite came to be and what exactly it entailed, it
is difficult to see why a hymn to such an obscure figure as Dionysos Perikionios might
have been composed for our collection unless it had some sort of immediate ritual
significance for the cult.
1: For Dionysos as wine god, see OH 50i.
5: Who is “everyone” and why were they tied up? The hymn seems to refer to a single
specific event, and up to this point the one that makes the most sense is the first
“birth” of Dionysos at the death of Semele. Imprisonment, however, is not part of
that story. Another possibility is suggested by a comparison to Euripides Bacchae.
While there is no explicit connection in terms of language, and while Euripides
mentions the palace of Pentheus and not Kadmos, nonetheless in the play Dionysos
first causes an earthquake and then sets his mother's grave on fire with lightning
bolts (576–603). The latter detail is certainly an explicit allusion to Dionysos' birth,
the legitimacy of which is called in question at the outset of the play. Afterward we
find out how Dionysos tricked Pentheus in order to escape his earlier imprisonment

(604–641).  Our  poet  seems  to  have  grafted  some  literary  antecedents  to  the
particular  ritual  act  that  this  hymn  accompanies.  The  vivid  details  stir  the
imagination of the participants. In essence, the performance of this hymn recreates a
mythic scenario, composed of the birth of Dionysos (compare the ritual of the table
mentioned  in OH  44.6–9+n)  and  aspects  of  his  epiphanies  found  in  previous
literature. The “everyone” then would be the initiates, and the “bonds” a metaphor
for their previous uninitiated life. Dionysos, a deity of transitional states (see OH
30i), is often connected with freedom and release (see OH 50i); indeed, the Romans
called him Liber (“the free one”).
48. To Sabazios
Sabazios was a Phrygian god. His worship is first attested to have reached Greece by the
end of the fifth century. Aristophanes mentions him in a number of contexts. Two
guards attribute their sleepiness to him, probably because of intoxication (Wasps 9–10).
His mysteries are mentioned in the context of female ecstatic worship (Lysistrata 387–
390), and he is mentioned alongside Kybele in a list of gods related to birds (Birds 873–
875). One fragment, from the play Seasons, calls him Phrygian and a player of the aulos
(fragment 578), an instrument particularly connected to Dionysian ecstatic worship.
Demosthenes  gives  us  some  insight  into  the  practice  of  his  cult  in  fourth-century
Athens, although we need to take his account with a grain of salt because he is trying to
smear his rival Aeschines (18.259–260; see also Orphic fragment 577). While Sabazios
is not explicitly named as the god of this cult, the latter is invoked with the cry “euoi,
Saboi,” and Strabo explicitly links the cult to Sabazios and Kybele (10.3.18). There are
a number of Dionysian elements present: ivy, winnowing-basket (see OH 46.2–3n),
fawn-skins, ecstatic dancing and singing. Initiations are mentioned, and one element that
stands out is the handling of live snakes (also an element in some Dionysian cults; see
also OH 46.7n). Sabazios' name appears in Orphic contexts, although he is not attested
in any of the fragments attributed to Orpheus. He is identified with Dionysos as the son
of Zeus and Persephone (Diodorus Siculus 4.4.1), and Clement of Alexandria mentions
his mysteries in the context of Zeus mating with Persephone in the form of a snake
(Protrepticus 2.16.2). For the possible influence of Sabazios' worship on this Orphic
genealogy, see West, 1983, pp. 97 and 110. However, the importance of Sabazios in
Asia Minor also allowed his identification with Zeus, as in our hymn, which retains the
Dionysian connection by making Sabazios the father of Dionysos (but see OH 49.2n);
interestingly  enough,  the  historian  Mnaseas  called  Sabazaios  the  son  of  Dionysos
(fragment 36). Among the four inscriptions dedicated to “mother Hipta,” Sabazios-Zeus
is mentioned in three of them (see OH 49i). This hymn fits the birth theme that is

prominent in this central Dionysian group (see OH 44i) and, with the following hymn,
forms a male-female pairing, a familiar pattern in the collection (see OH 14.8–9n). That
two divinities from Phrygia in Asia Minor are given such a prominent position is a
strong indication that our cult was also located in this region.
3 Eiraphiotes
: Dionysos is also called this name in the Homeric Hymn to Dionysos 1.and in some Orphic accounts of his birth from Zeus' thigh; see Orphic fragment 328.
Of the etymological explanations for this name given in antiquity, most relevant is
the one that derives it from the verb meaning “sew” and it thus might be rendered as
“the one sewn up”; see OH 44i and OH 50.3n.
49. To Hipta
Hipta was an Asiatic mother goddess of whom very little is known. Proclus mentions
her in connection with the Orphic version of Dionysos' birth from Zeus' thigh: she
receives the child in a winnowing-basket wreathed with a snake and takes him to Kybele
at Mount Ida (see OH 46i). This myth—or a similar one—might be behind Strabo's
notice that Sabazios-Dionysos is “in some way the child of Mother” (10.3.15): the
qualification “in some way” suggests something along the lines of a nurse or adopted
mother. The only other certain instances of Hipta's name come from four inscriptions
found in an area not too distant from Mount Tmolos in Lydia; see Morand 2001, pp.
177–181. On three of these inscriptions Sabazios-Zeus is also mentioned (see OH 48i).
This pairing is mirrored in the placement of this hymn after the one to Sabazios. Hipta
is addressed as “Mother” in all four, which strongly suggests an identification with
Kybele; compare the vase painting mentioned in OH 46i. Such an identification might
be intended in our hymn, since she is called “chthonic mother” (line 4) and connected
with Mount Ida in Phrygia and Mount Tmolos (see OH 27i). That Proclus distinguishes
between Hipta and Mother does not entail their separation in our collection; he might
have had a different version of the story in mind, or tried to rationally reconcile two
slightly different ones. Indeed, Strabo might have called Hipta by the more familiar
“Mother” in his report.
2 Sabos: An alternate name to Sabazios. The mysteries mentioned here are coordinated
with the “dances of Iacchos” in line 3. Since Iacchos can be another name for
Dionysos  (see OH  42.4n),  it  would  seem  that  Sabos  is  being  identified  with
Dionysos,  contrary  to OH  48.1–3.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  our  poet  is
distinguishing each name to refer to a different entity or at least taking advantage of
the different names to intentionally blur lines. Mise is described as taking part in
Phrygian mysteries with Mother; see OH 42.6.

50. To Lysios Lenaios
This hymn is dedicated to Dionysos under two epithets. The first one, “Lysios,” means
“he that frees, he that sets loose, the redeemer.” The notion of freedom from restraint,
whether this restraint be physical, social, or spiritual, was an essential part of the
religious conception of Dionysos. Insofar as he is a god of transitions, he “loosens” the
moorings that tie an individual to any particular fixity; see OH 30i. Myth reflects this
particular trait: Dionysos cannot be bound (e.g., Homeric Hymn to Dionysos 7.13–15),
and he can free others from their bonds (e.g., Euripides Bacchae 443–450); see also OH
47.5+n. Lysios was a cult title of Dionysos (see Pausanias 2.2.6–7, 2.7.5–6, and 9.16.6),
found also at OH 52.2. It is used as an epithet at OH 42.4 (“redeeming”) as well as in
lines 2 and 8 of this hymn. In Orphic contexts, Dionysos is said to be able to release one
from madness and other suffering (see OH 53i) and even free an initiate from the guilt
inherited from his murder at the hands of the Titans (Bacchic gold tablets no. 26a and b;
see also Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 132 and 147). Dionysos, more so than any of the other
divinities in the collection, is the god that saves. Our poet, however, has evidently opted
for a more limited view of Lysios, the one joined with the idea of the freedom of
restraint as induced by intoxication. The second epithet, Lenaios, makes this clear, as it
functions to limit the preceding Lysios. The word means “of the wine-press” (Greek
“lēnos”; see Diodorus Siculus 3.63.4). It was a cult title of Dionysos at Athens and
connected with the Lenaia festival, which was a celebration that took place every
January. The Lenaia became an official venue for the performance of comedy and then
eventually tragedy in the second half of the fifth century, although it was not as
prestigious as the Greater Dionysia. We know very little about this festival. Of particular
relevance is that officials from the Eleusinian Mysteries were involved in the procession
and that part of the ritual involved the worshippers calling on the god as “son of Semele,
Iacchos, giver of wealth” (for Iacchos, see OH 42.4n). While the name itself would
seem to suggest this festival revolved around wine, modern scholars have favored a
different interpretation that sees the name Lenaia as being derived from “lēnai,” another
word for maenads (see OH 52i). And this etymology might very well have been on the
mind of our initiates, for the name of the festival occurs at OH 54.9 in a clearly
maenadic context (cf. line 8 of this hymn, which contains maenadic imagery). For more
on the Lenaia, see Pickard-Cambridge 1988, pp. 25–42, and Larson 2007, pp. 134–
135. Our hymn, however, focuses on Dionysos as the god of wine and its effects: the
release from cares, the happiness it brings, and the ever-present danger of disorderly
conduct. This ambiguity of the power of wine is seen in the story of Ikarios. When
Dionysos comes to Attika, he is received hospitably by this man. In gratitude, Dionysos
teaches him the secrets of making wine. Ikarios shares the fruits of his labor with some
shepherds  one  night,  who,  later  believing  to  have  been  poisoned,  kill  him  (see

Apollodoros 3.14.7). Normally, though, wine was seen as a beneficial gift the god gives
to human beings as a temporary respite from their daily existence (e.g., Hesiod Works
and Days 614 and Euripides Bacchae 280–282; see also OH 30i). Dionysos is often
depicted in the iconography himself in the act of drinking or carrying the necessary
accoutrements, usually accompanied by satyrs and/or maenads (e.g., Boardman 1975,
pll. 6, 110, 256, and 343). He is intimately connected with the symposium and revelry.
Wine can be thought of as the god himself (see Euripides Bacchae 284–285), who,
when ingested, possesses the worshipper (enthousiasmos) and effects a state of ekstasis
(see OH 30i).
This hymn continues the theme of Dionysos' birth (lines  and 3), and, as with
previous  hymns  in  this  grouping  (see OH  44i),  contains  a  reference  to  a  specific
Dionysian  cult.  The  connection  with  vegetation,  introduced  with OH  46.2,  is
understandably strong here (lines 2, 4, 6, 10), and Dionysos seems to be imagined as the
grape-vine itself in line 5 (see also OH 30.4–5 and cf. OH 56i). There is much overlap
with OH 52, both in linguistic and iconographic terms.
1 two mothers: For the convoluted references to Dionysos' births in the collection, see
OH 30.2n.
2 unforgettable seed, many-named: Comparably invoked are Protogonos (OH 6.4), an
Orphic figure that was sometimes identified with Dionysos (see OH 6.3n+i), and
Mise (OH 42.2), who appears to be a female form of Dionysos and who also receives
the  epithet  “many-named”  alongside  “unforgettable  seed”  in  the  same  metrical
position. Dionysos is again called “many-named” at OH 45.2 and OH 52.1 (and see
note), and it is particularly apt in this grouping where he is invoked as Bacchos (OH
44–54 passim, i.e., the entire group), Bassareus/Bassaros (OH 45.2 and OH 52.2),
Liknites (OH 46.1 and OH 52.3), Perikionios (OH 47.1), Eiraphiotes (OH 48.3),
Iacchos (OH 49.3), Lysios and Lenaios (OH 50 and OH 52.2), the God of Trienneial
Feasts (OH 45 and OH 52), Eubouleus (OH 52.4), Erikepaios (OH 52.6), the God of
Annual Feasts (OH 53), and perhaps Sabos (see OH 49.2+n).
3 born of secrecy: This refers to Dionysos' birth from the thigh of Zeus (cf. Homeric
Hymn to Dionysos 1.7); see OH 44i. He is the “secret offspring of Zeus” at OH 52.5;
see also Supplementum Hellenisticum 276.9 (Kallimakhos). For secrecy in mystery
cults, see OH 30.3n.
5 many-shaped god, you burst forth from the earth: Although many entities in the
collection are described as having many shapes or forms, it is particularly apt of
Dionysos, a god whose fluid nature resists any form of permanence (see OH 30i). In
addition to adopting various mortal disguises (e.g., as his own priest in Euripides
Bacchae), he can also appear as an animal, such as a bull (see OH 30.3–4+n), goat,

and  lion  (Homeric Hymn  to  Dionysos  7.44).  In  this  line  he  even  seems  to  be
identified with the grape-vine itself. Compare lines  and 10, where he is the one
who yields the sweet fruit, and see further OH 30.5+n, OH 51.3n, and OH 53.8–
10+i.  The  same  effect  of  blending  god  and  object  is  found  in  the  hymn  to
Persephone (see OH 29.12–14+n); see further OH 56i and OH 67.5+n. For the many
forms of Protogonos, see OH 6i.
8: For the thyrsos, see OH 45.5+n; for madness and the revel, see OH 52.7–8n.
51. To the Nymphs
The Greek word “numphē” generally refers to a young woman, either of marriageable
age or newly-wed (see OH 71.1n), but it also signifies any of a variety of minor female
deities of nature. Nymphs were connected with a number of geographical features:
forests, trees, mountains, springs, and meadows (Odyssey 6.122–124, Homeric Hymn to
Aphrodite  5.97–99).  Groups  often  are  called  by  specific  names  that  reflect  their
topographical associations. Thus Dryads are nymphs of the trees (Greek “drus”), Oreads
are nymphs of the mountains (Greek “oros”), Naiads are nymphs of the springs (from
the Greek verb “naō,” “I flow”), and so forth; see also notes to lines 12 and 14. Nymphs
are referred to as the daughters of Zeus by early poets (e.g., Iliad 6.420, Hesiod
fragment 304, Alkaios fragment 343). The Ash Tree Nymphs, on the other hand, are
born from the blood that drips from the severed genitals of Sky (Hesiod Theogony 183–
187). Hesiod also gives the mountain nymphs a different genealogy, making them the
sisters of the Kouretes and satyrs (see OH 31i and OH 54i). The Nereids and Okeanids
(see line 1 and note), both pluralities of young women connected with natural features,
could also be construed as nymphs. Our hymn identifies them specifically with the
Okeanids at first but subtly widens the scope to include their traditional venues of
woods, mountains, and meadows while stressing their connection with water (see note to
lines 15–16). Rustic and pastoral settings away from civilization are their domain. Caves
and grottos are favorite haunts. They are found running with Artemis, frolicking with
Hermes and Pan (see note to line 8), or sporting with Eros, Aphrodite, and Dionysos
(see OH 58.3n). They also are part of the Dionysian thiasos (see OH 54.6), and in some
accounts they are the ones who raise the infant Dionysos after the death of Semele, as
here (see line 3 and note). This last detail integrates the hymn in the series that focuses
on Dionysos' birth (see OH 44i). We capitalize “Nymphs” when they refer to this
particular grouping.
Nymphs were widely worshipped in antiquity, almost always tied to a particular
locale. Odysseus kisses the ground on his return to Ithaka and prays to the Naiads whose
sacred cave is nearby (Odyssey 13.345–360). A famous cave to the nymphs and Pan on

Mount  Parnassos,  the  Korykian  Cave,  gained  Panhellenic  importance  due  to  its
proximity to Delphi. Any feature of the land could become a place to worship a nymph
or group of nymphs. For more details on their cults, see Larson 2007, pp. 153–155.
Nymphs were known to kidnap men that caught their fancy from time to time, such as
Herakles'  friend  Hylas  (Apollonios  of  Rhodes Argonautika  1.1207–1239)  and
Hermaphroditos (Ovid Metamorphoses 4.285–388), a belief that survives in modern-day
Greek folklore.
: The Okeanids are the daughters of Okeanos and Tethys; see OH 83i and OH 22i,
respectively. They may have been identified with the Nereids with whom they are
sometimes confused; see OH 24.9–11n.
3 nurses of Bacchos: See OH 30.8n and OH 46.2–3n. Nymphs often were viewed as
nurturers of the young, similar to their mistress Artemis, and Dionysos is not the
only baby they rear. Aphrodite announces that they will raise her child Aineias until
he reaches adolescence (Homeric Hymn  to  Aphrodite 5.256–275); the chorus in
Sophokles Oedipus Tyrannus fancifully speculate whether Oedipus was born from a
nymph and either Pan, Apollon, Hermes, or Dionysos (1099–1109); and Zeus was
nursed by nymphs (Kallimakhos Hymn to Zeus 32–48), as was Hermaphroditos (see
the introduction to this hymn). That they are both the nurses of Dionysos and the
ones who “nurture” the fruits (line 4)  might  indicate  an  identification  between
Dionysos and vegetation, as apparently at OH 50.5 (see note there and OH 53i).
4 you haunt meadows: When Persephone was abducted by Hades, she was picking
flowers in a meadow with the Okeanids; see Homeric Hymn to Demeter 2.1–8 and
2.414–425. This meadow is sometimes located in Nysa (see OH 46.2–3n). For
chthonic associations of meadows, see OH 18.2n.
8 Pan: The nymphs are often found in connection with Pan (e.g., Homeric Hymn to Pan
19.19–27). They are mentioned together at OH O.15. See also OH 11.9+n.
12 herds of goats: Compare Odyssey 9.154–155, where Odysseus believes that the
nymphs have sent him and his men goats. Like Hermes, nymphs were believed
capable of increasing the fertility of herds. This is presumably the reason why the
faithful swineherd Eumaios offers a portion of pork to the nymphs and Hermes
(Odyssey 14.435–436). The nymphs known as the Epimeliads (from Greek “mēlon,”
“sheep”) probably were thought to increase flocks of sheep (Pausanias 8.4.2).
14 Hamadryad: A tree nymph (Dryad) whose life is coextensive with that of the tree in
which she dwells (Greek “hama,” “together with”). Their appearance in myth is
particularly tied to stories of an impious woodsman cutting down the tree, thus
killing the nymph as well. See Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite (cited in the note to line

3), Pindar fragment 165, Kallimakhos Hymn to Delos 79–85, Apollonios of Rhodes
Argonautika 2.475–483, and Ovid Metamorphoses 8.738–878.
15–16: For Nysa, see note to line 4 above. By “frenzied,” it is suggested that the
Nymphs are maenads (see OH 52i), as at OH 53.2; cf. Iliad 6.130–137, Pindar
fragment 70b.12–14, and the chorus to Euripides' Bacchae. Deo is another name for
Demeter  (see OH  40.1n).  She  and  Dionysos  are  joined  together  here  in  their
capacities as divinities of grain and vegetation respectively, both of which require
water for growth. This involves the Nymphs, since they are explicitly and repeatedly
connected with water in this hymn. They are Okeanids (line 1), “clothed in dew”
(line 6), and “water-loving” (line 14), they “frequent springs” (line 6), and they are
asked to “pour streams of pure rain” (line 18). They are chthonic (line 3) not only
because of their fertility associations but also because the sources of rivers, springs,
and lakes are underground (compare line 2). Their description in line 9 equally
applies to mountain streams, and that they find pleasure in cold (line 13) probably
refers to their love of fresh, cold bodies of water. In the Lesser Krater, attributed to
Orpheus, nymphs are actually equated with water (Orphic fragment 413.2). Their
liquid nature makes them fit companions of Dionysos (see OH 30i).
52. To the God of Triennial Feasts
This hymn is the first of a group of three that bring to a close the Dionysian, cultic
section of the Hymns. The previous three hymns dedicated to Dionysos (OH 46, 47, 50)
call on the god under specific cult titles. The titles of this hymn and the following two,
in  contrast,  refer  to  general  characteristics  of  cult  rather  than  any  specific  one.
“Triennial”  refers  to  a  celebration  every  two  years  (the  ancient  Greeks  counted
inclusively). While there were a number of festivals that occurred biennially (e.g., the
Isthmian  Games  and  Nemean  Games),  it  appears  that  a  large  number  of  such
celebrations were devoted to Dionysos, particularly maenadic ones, e.g., that of the
Thyiads (Pausanias 10.4.3; see also Euripides Bacchae 133, Diodorus Siculus 4.3.2–3,
Larson 2007, pp. 127–128, and further OH 46i). This hymn also follows the trend, as it
primarily depicts the kind of processions that are typically performed by maenads
(sometimes  with  satyrs;  see OH  54i).  While  many  of  the  traditional  trappings  of
maenadic  processions  appear  intermittently  in  the  other  Dionysian  hymns  of  the
collection, nearly all of them are mentioned here. The worshippers proceed at night,
guided by torchlight (see OH 9.3n). They brandish thyrsi (see OH 45.5n) and wear fawn-
skins. Madness seeps into them along with the god. Vigorous movement leading to wild
dancing and singing creates a raucous revel (see note to lines 7–8). The ivy-wreathed
group, the thiasos, heads to the mountains, where animals are ripped apart (sparagmos;

see OH 11.9n, OH 30.5n, and OH 45.5n) and the raw flesh devoured (ōmophagia; see
line  and note); other wondrous works, such as causing milk and wine to spring from
the ground and the handling of snakes, are performed by the frenzied. To what extent
this ideal reflects real practice and to what extent it is the result of the powerful images
Euripides evokes in his Bacchae is something that is debated by scholars (see Larson
2007, pp. 136–137, with further references). Whatever the case may be, by the time our
collection  had  been  composed,  such  elements  had  become  standard  indications  of
ecstatic Dionysian worship and iconography, so much so that their appearance in the
Hymns does not imply that the initiates were female, any more than the hymn to
Eleusinian Demeter entails the group was located at Eleusis (and note that Kadmos and
Teiresias dress up as maenads in Euripides Bacchae 169–214; cf. further Herodotos
4.79 and OH 54i). It is a routine rhetorical strategy in hymns to remind the gods of their
favorite haunts and activities. This particular one focuses on Dionysos as the leader of
processions. The god is often depicted in literature and art as participating in his own
rituals among his worshippers (e.g., Euripides Bacchae 135–167; see also OH 53.6). In
the Hymns, a number of female divinities are portrayed as maenads or described with
maenadic imagery (see OH 1.3n), and Themis in her hymn founds maenadic rites (see
OH 79.7–10+n). Such participation on the part of the gods helps blur the line between
worshipped and worshipper, bringing the initiates into a more intimate contact with the
powers they invoke (see OH 30i). There may have been a(nother) torch-lit procession at
this point of the ritual (albeit probably not to a mountain), and Dionysos and his thiasos,
upon finding such kindred spirits engaged in mimetic performances, would be more
disposed to join the initiates in the ceremony. Triennial celebrations are mentioned at
OH 30.5, OH 44.7, OH 53.4–5, and OH 54.3; see also Homeric Hymn to Dionysos 1.11.
1 many-named: See OH 50.2n; as in that hymn, so, too, here Dionysos is addressed by
many names.
2 bull-horned, ... Lysios, Lenaios: For Dionysos and bulls, see OH 30.3–4n. The cult
titles Lysios and Lenaios, the titles under which OH 50 is dedicated to Dionysos, are
repeated here, as well as that of Liknites in line 3, to whom OH 46 is addressed.
2–3 Nysian ... conceived in fire. / Nourished in the thigh: These lines reflect the
traditional myth of Dionysos' birth, for which see OH 30.2n and OH 44i. “Nourished
in the thigh” alludes to that part of the story when Zeus, having saved the fetus after
the immolation of Semele, sews him into his thigh to hide him from Hera; hence, he
is the “secret offspring of Zeus” in line 5 (see also OH 48.3n and OH 50.3n). For
Nysa, see OH 46.2–3n.
4 thyrsos-shaking Eubouleus: For the thyrsos, see OH 45.5n; for Eubouleus, see OH
30.6n.

5 nature three-fold: It is not entirely clear what is meant by this. At OH 30.2, Dionysos
is called “two-natured, thrice-born” (and see note). The three natures indicated here
might  refer  to  those  births  in  that  he  has  three  different  “mothers”:  Semele,
Persephone, and the thigh of Zeus. On the other hand, since Dionysos was devoured
by the Titans and thereby had contact with them, it is possible that his nature is
threefold: human through Semele, Titanic through the Titans, and Olympian through
Zeus  (cf.  the  composite  nature  of  human  beings  in  Orphic  anthropogonies,
summarized and discussed in Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 85–90). Another possibility is
that Dionysos' nature can be seen to embody the bestial, the human, and the divine.
As with the contradictory references to Dionysos' birth throughout the collection, the
ambiguity might be intentional.
6: “Primeval” is the translation of “prōtogone,” which naturally recalls the Orphic entity
known as Protogonos, who also shares with Dionysos the sobriquets Erikepaios,
Eubouleus, and Bromios; see OH 6.4n+i. Through this identity, Dionysos can rightly
be called both the “father and son of the gods.”
7 raw flesh: See the introduction to this hymn and OH 30.5+n.
7–8: Madness is a running motif throughout the collection, as many divinities are
described as bringing it and/or being able to cure it, particularly those beings that are
related to ecstatic cults, with the concomitant belief that the worshipper becomes
possessed by the divinity in question (see OH 71.11n). Madness thus also finds
expression in the wild abandon to song and dance in the revel; see OH 27.11n and
OH 50.8. This is the state of ekstasis that results from enthousiasmos (see OH 30i),
and something that is not limited to Dionysos alone (see OH 11i and OH 27i).
Dionysos' connection with madness was probably facilitated by his connection with
wine and intoxication (see OH 50i). As often with the case of this god, the normal
order in the world is subverted (cf. its use to great effect as a running motif in
Euripides Bacchae) and leads to paradox; here, madness is transformed into lucidity
(see also OH 54.11). For Dionysos as a dancing god, see OH 45.7+n.
10 annual feasts: This looks ahead to the title of the next hymn, where the triennial
celebration is reciprocally mentioned in line 5.
11 Paian: This is normally a name for Apollon; see OH 34.1n; for Dionysos' worship at
Delphi, see OH 46i.
53. To the God of Annual Feasts
This is the last hymn to Dionysos in the collection, and it is closely related to the

previous one (OH 52i). There, the emphasis is on maenadism. We find this theme here
as well in lines –7, which serves as a bridge to the following hymn, but Dionysos is
first and foremost presented as a god of vegetation, whose “awakening” in the spring
heralds the return of plant-life after the winter; cf. the Thyiads at Delphi who wake
Dionysos Liknites; see OH 46i. Plutarch reports a similar practice among the Phrygians
and Paphlagonians, who believed a god was asleep in the winter, and he further says that
the Phrygians awakened him in the summer by “Bacchizing” (De Iside et Osiride 378f).
As our group of initiates might have been active in Phrygia, it is just possible that
Plutarch is referring to the local rite that was made “Orphic” by the group (less likely
the ritual itself). This is the only place in the collection where Dionysos is called
“chthonic” (line 1), and his association with the underworld, where he “sleeps,” is
indicated by the “sacred halls of Persephone” (line 3). The initiates invoke him with
“fruity” terms (lines 8–10), and elsewhere in the collection he appears to be identified
with the fruit itself (see OH 50.5+n). He is therefore much like Adonis and Persephone
(see OH 56i and OH 41i, respectively), whose time split between the upper and lower
worlds was interpreted as the cause of the seasons (and cf. line 7 of this hymn). In
Orphic fragment 350, someone is foretelling Dionysos of his future worship in annual
rites and his ability to free mortals from suffering and madness; see West 1983, pp, 99–
100, for translation and brief discussion, and further OH 71.11n.
4 pure: For the importance of ritual purity, see OH 30.4n.
4–5 every third year. / ... triennial revel: See OH 52i, which also refers to annual
feasts in line 10.
6 he sings a hymn: For Dionysos as participant in his own worship, see OH 30i and OH
50i.
8 horned: For the horned god, see OH 30.3–4+n.
54. To Silenos Satyros and the Bacchae
This  is  the  last  hymn  of  the  group  whose  overriding  theme  is  Dionysian  cult.  It
addresses the figure Silenos and mentions the other traditional members of the mythical
Dionysian thiasos, the silens/satyrs and the Bacchae (or maenads); for the Bacchae, see
OH 52i. The silens and satyrs were probably originally distinct, but very early merged
into one group and their names are used interchangeably. The first mention of silens is
on the François Vase (see Boardman 1991, pp. 33–34 and pl. 46), and satyrs are first
mentioned by Hesiod (fragment 123, preserved at Strabo 10.3.19; see OH 51i). As line
7 of this hymn tells us, they are half-man, half-beast. Specifically, they are for the most

part human, with equine tales and ears, snub noses, and a receding hairline; their bodies
can be covered with hair, and early vase paintings sometimes give them hooves instead
of feet. They are often shown ithyphallic. Sometimes they are found with hircine
features. These are creatures of the wild, and they pursue quite a hedonistic lifestyle,
spending  their  days  laughing,  drinking,  dancing,  making  music,  and  chasing  after
nymphs  (see,  e.g.,  Homeric Hymn  to  Aphrodite  5.262–263).  While  originally
independent of Dionysos, they became part of his retinue at an early date. They were
insanely popular on vase paintings; see, for example, Hedreen's 1992 book-length study
(which only treats the Archaic period!). In myth, they play no significant role outside of
being in the company of Dionysos (e.g., the story of the return of Hephaistos; see OH
66i). We find them as the chorus of a peculiar kind of drama, the satyr play, which was
introduced with (or shortly after) Attic tragedy. In Classical times, a tragic poet would
stage  three  tragedies  followed  by  a  satyr  play  at  the  Greater  Dionysia.  These
performances were light-hearted affairs, aptly called “tragedy at play” by Demetrius (On
Style 169). Despite the fact that the only extant satyr play is Euripides' Kyklops, on the
basis of this and numerous fragments we have some idea of the nature of this genre.
Lissarrague neatly sums it up thus: “The recipe is as follows: take one myth, add the
satyrs, and observe the results” (1990, p. 236). The chorus in a satyr play is led by
Papposilenos  (Granddaddy  Silenos!),  who  is  distinguished  from  the  rest  by  being
costumed as an old satyr, covered with white hair (as depicted on the Pronomos vase,
which shows the actors at a rehearsal; see Boardman 1989, pp. 167–168 and pl. 323);
he is the leader of the thiasos here as well (see line ). Silenos occasionally plays a role
in myth as a distinct individual. His most famous “exploit” is being found drunk in the
garden of Midas, king of Phrygia. The king returns the lost satyr to Dionysos, who
grants him a boon that turns into the famous “golden touch” (Ovid Metamorphoses
1.85–145). Another satyr, Marsyas, either invents the reed instrument known as the
auloi or picks them up after Athene discards them (see OH 32i). He then challenges
Apollon to a music contest in Phrygia, loses, and is flayed alive by the god (see Ovid
Metamorphses 11.146–193). In cult, too, the satyrs are completely dependent on their
master, although Pausanias does mention a temple for Silenos at Elis and stresses it is
completely  independent  from  Dionysos  (6.24.8).  Male  worshippers  of  Dionysian
ecstatic rituals could apparently take the role of satyrs, as well as pans, as is attested by
Plato (Laws 815c–d) and by early rituals involving masks (see Burkert 1985, pp. 103–
104); see also OH 52i. Satyrs and Silenos himself seem to be entirely ignored in
Orphism, maybe because their light-hearted nature did not fit well with the serious
cosmic and eschatological themes found in the mysteries (but see note to line 10 below).
Their appearance in our collection is due to their traditional association with Dionysos.
As they are followers of Dionysos, so, too, their hymn follows his. It is possible that our
initiates dressed up as satyrs and Bacchae (perhaps just for this part of the ritual); see

also OH 45i and OH 52i.
1 foster father: On some vase paintings, Silenos receives the infant Dionysos from
Hermes (see, e.g., Boardman 1989, p. 225 and pl. 126), and it seems that his rearing
of Dionysos was mentioned in satyr play (alluded to in Euripides Kyklops 1–8; cf.
Horace Ars Poetica 239 and the euhemerized account in Diodorus Siculus 4.4.3–4).
In this respect, Silenos is similar to the centaur Kheiron, another horse-human
hybrid, who often raises heroes.
3 triennial feasts: See note to line 9 and OH 52i.
5 wakeful reveler: This refers to the all-night character of ecstatic Dionysian worship.
If the ritual in which the Hymns were performed took place at night, as it seems
likely (see OH 3i and OH 78i), then Silenos would be a model for our initiates, who
might be getting a little sleepy at this point! See also OH 85.9–10n.
6 Naiads: For this particular type of nymph, see OH 51i.
9 Lenaian: OH 50 is addressed to Lysios Lenaios; see the introduction to that hymn.
10 revealing torch-lit rites: Silenos and the satyrs are sometimes portrayed as being
among the first initiates in Dionysian mysteries (see, e.g., Euripides Bacchae 120–
134). As in the opening address where Orpheus' initiation of Mousaios would have
been felt to be paradigmatic of all future initiations, so, too, Silenos and company
function  as  the  mythic  paradigm  of  passing  down  esoteric  knowledge  to  new
initiates; see further OH 76.7n. Despite their wild and unrestrained temperament,
these creatures sometimes do display a divine wisdom. In some versions of the
Midas story, Silenos is intentionally captured by the king who wishes to know his
secrets (see Herodotos 8.138.3, who locates the story in Macedonia, and Pausanias
1.4.5; compare also Vergil's sixth eclogue). Alkibiades' long praise of Sokrates
ironically  plays  on  the  satyrs'  contradictory  nature  of  surface  chicanery  and
concealed knowledge (Plato Symposium 215a–222d), which fits well the context here
of Silenos being a revealer of secret rites. The hybrid nature of these creatures in
general, both physically and psychologically, makes them very suitable companions
for their master Dionysos (see OH 30i).
11 finding calm in the revels: This paradoxical statement is very similar to what is
expressed at OH 52.7–8 (and see note).
55. To Aphrodite
Aphrodite is the goddess of love, beauty, and sexual relations. For Homer, she was the

daughter of Zeus and Dione (Iliad 5.370–417), a goddess sometimes considered a Titan,
sometimes a nymph (see OH O.19n); her name is a feminine variation of Zeus. Hesiod
gives another account, in which she is born after Kronos castrates his father Sky and
tosses the severed genitals into the sea. They undergo a sort of foamy chemical reaction
out  of  which  Aphrodite  is  born  (Theogony  188–206).  Hesiod's  story  teems  with
etymological explanations. Aphrodite is so called because she was born from foam
(Greek “aphros”). She bears the names Kythereia because she came to the island
Kythera; and the name Kyprogenes because she first came out of the sea on Kypros and
so was “born on Kypros.” She also took on the epithet “fond of genitals” because of
their role in her birth. When she rises out of the sea, the Seasons are there to clothe her
and deck her out with all sorts of finery, a scene memorably portrayed in Botticelli's
painting The  Birth  of  Venus (compare also the sixth Homeric hymn). In Hesiod's
version, then, Aphrodite is thus a cosmic power that antedates Zeus and the other
Olympian gods. Orphic mythology accepted the Hesiodic version, although in at least
one variant it is Zelos (Envy) and Apate (Deception), not the Seasons, that welcome the
goddess out of the sea (Orphic fragment 189; see also OH 3.2n). The Orphics, however,
also maintained that she (or a second Aphrodite) was the daughter of Zeus but that Zeus
created her by ejaculating into the sea (Orphic fragment 260).
Aphrodite  was  connected  with  both  the  carnal  and  spiritual  sides  of  love,  and
accordingly literature portrays many sides of her. The Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite (no.
5) opens with a grand description of her powers: even Zeus is under her sway, and only
three goddesses—Artemis, Athene, and Hestia—are immune to her charms (5.1–44).
When Hera seeks to seduce Zeus to distraction during the Trojan War, she borrows a
magical piece of clothing from Aphrodite, a concrete manifestation of the love goddess'
abilities (Iliad 14.197–223). Aphrodite is raised to a cosmic principle of procreation,
much like in our hymn, in Lucretius' opening address to her (On the Nature of Things
1.1–49),  and  she  is  endowed  with  further  philosophical  embellishment  in  the
Neoplatonist Proclus' second hymn. Yet there is a comical side to this goddess as well.
She is caught having an affair with Ares by her husband, Hephaistos, and the entangled
lovers are displayed to the male gods, whereupon Apollon and Hermes engage in some
playful banter (Odyssey 8.266–366). It should be kept in mind that the bard in the story
who sings this tale does so to cheer up the sorrowing Odysseus. Apollonios of Rhodes
shows her as a frustrated mother at wit's end on how to handle her unruly child Eros
(Argonautika  3.1–166).  There  is  a  nasty  side  to  this  divinity,  too.  Helen  meekly
acquiesces to Aphrodite's demand to go to bed with Paris after the goddess ominously
warns her not to disobey (Iliad 3.383–420). She unceasingly victimizes the mortal
Psyche, first by asking Eros to make her fall in love with a monster; then, after Eros
saves Psyche only to be betrayed by her, Aphrodite imposes a series of impossibly
difficult tasks that eventually lead to Eros rescuing Psyche and a reconciliation with

Aphrodite  (Apuleius Metamorphoses  or The  Golden  Ass  4.28–6.24).  There  is  also
something sinister lurking in Sappho's depiction of the goddess, who can cause someone
to fall in love even if they are unwilling (fragment 1.21–24). Love can be pleasant,
wonderful, charming, exhilarating, frightening, and brutal—often all at the same time—
and the stories of Aphrodite provide firm evidence that the Greeks were acutely aware
of this complexity.
At Symposium 180d–181c, Plato sharply distinguishes two cult manifestations of the
goddess, Aphrodite Ourania (Aphrodite the Heavenly or Born from Sky) and Aphrodite
Pandemos (Aphrodite of All the People). The former, for him, represents the spiritual
side of love, while the latter the physical. However, in actual cult practice this distinction
is not observed. Indeed, Aphrodite Pandemos is found worshipped as a deity promoting
civic harmony, the power of love to soothe civil discord and bring opposing sides
together (see note to line ). Her daughter, Harmonia, may be seen as a reflection of
this (see OH 65i). Not surprisingly, Aphrodite is also worshipped in connection with
marriage, particularly the producing of children. She also protects sailors. For more on
Aphrodite and her role in cult, see Burkert 1985, pp. 152–156, and Larson 2007, pp.
114–125. She is found connected with other male gods in both myth and cult, in
particular  Hermes,  Ares,  and  Hephaistos;  see OH  57.3–5n, OH  65i, OH  66i,
respectively. The significance of these pairings seems largely to consist of a harmonious
unison of opposites (male/female, life/death, war/peace, beauty/ugliness). We also find
her connected with Dionysos in cult (Pausanias 7.25.9) and in our hymn (lines 2 and 7;
compare “maddening” in line 13, and also see OH 56i). As a goddess of beauty, she
often consorts with other beautiful goddesses, such as the Seasons and Graces (see OH
43i and OH 60i, respectively).
The placement of this hymn resumes the series of major Olympian gods that had
been interrupted by a long digression on divinities associated with Dionysos, and the
resumption is facilitated by Aphrodite's connection to him (see further OH 69i). The
hymns to Adonis (OH 56), Eros (OH 58), and the Graces (OH 60) are grouped with her
for obvious reasons. Chthonic Hermes (OH 57) is said to be her son in his hymn, while
the Fates (OH 59) also appear to have been conceived as connected with Aphrodite,
perhaps as her daughters (see note to line 3 and OH 59i), thus forming a triplet with
Chthonic Hermes and Eros. OH 61–68 may also be considered part of the “Aphrodite”
group; see OH 61i, OH 65i, and OH 68i.
1 heavenly, smiling Aphrodite, praised in many hymns: The first word of the hymn,
“heavenly,”  is  one  of  the  main  cult  titles  of  the  goddess  (Aphrodite  Ourania).
“Smiling” is a translation of the Greek “philommeidēs,” which literally means “fond
of smiles.” The word, like the similar “philommēdēs” (“fond of genitals”), is a
common epithet of the goddess, who is often portrayed as smiling. Aphrodite is

indeed “praised in many hymns”: there are three Homeric hymns dedicated to her
(nos. 5, 6, 10), two hymns by Proclus (nos. 2, 5), and literary pieces in the hymnic
style, including Sappho fragments 1 and 2 and the opening of Lucretius' On the
Nature of Things. The reference to “many hymns” probably is first and foremost to
the ubiquity of her worship through the identification with similar goddesses in other
traditions and thus anticipates lines –19. This hymn, then, is imagined as following
worthy precedents.
3 mother of Necessity: Necessity (Greek Anankē) is a divinity who plays a role in
Orphic theogony. She mates with Time in the form of a winged serpent, and their
children are Ether and Khaos (Orphic fragment 77, 110–113; see West 1983, pp. 70,
194–197, and 231 for more details). If “necessity” in the hymn to the Fates should
be personified, then our poet would appear to have conceived them to be the
daughters of Aphrodite (see OH 59.18n). Necessity is identified with Adrasteia in
Orphism. As Adrasteia can sometimes be identified with Nemesis, the inevitability
of Nemesis might also explain the position of OH 61–64 in the collection (see OH
61i). The idea of compulsion appears in the imagery of yoking (lines 4, 13, 14);
compare also Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite 5.33–43, Sappho fragment 1.21–24, and
PGM 4.2934.
4–7: Aphrodite's wide-ranging powers are expressed through their geographical extent
over the sky, earth, and sea, a rhetorical strategy employed in describing the powers
of other gods as well; of particular relevance here are the hymns to Rhea (OH 14.9–
10) and the Mother of the Gods (OH 27.4–8); see further OH 10.14–16n. Eros is
similarly described in his hymn, although his powers extend beneath the earth as well
(OH 58.5–7). See also Homeric Hymn  to  Aphrodite 5.2–6, Euripides Hippolytos
447–451, and Lucretius On the Nature of Things 1.1–27.
8 Erotes: A divinity may sometimes be conceived as a plurality, as for example Pan and
Eileithyia (see OH 2i and Burkert 1985, pp. 170–171). Pindar also makes Aphrodite
the mother of Erotes (fragment 122.4), and Proclus gives the group a Neoplatonic
interpretation in his second hymn at line 3 (see van den Berg 2001, pp. 199–200).
9 Persuasion: Sometimes Persuasion is conceived as a separate goddess. She was
worshipped together with Aphrodite at Athens (Pausanias 1.22.3). Sappho makes her
the daughter of Aphrodite (fragment 200). In the decking out of Pandora, Persuasion
joins the Graces in placing necklaces around her neck, while the Seasons crown her
with a garland of spring flowers (Hesiod Works  and  Days 73–75). She is thus
conceived as part of the traditional retinue of Aphrodite. One of the Okeanids is
named Persuasion (Hesiod Theogony 349), and this might be the same Persuasion in
the Pandora episode. In Orphic theogony, Eros and Persuasion are the parents of

Hygeia (see OH 68i). Aphrodite's connection with persuasion is a function both of its
utility in amatory pursuits as well as its benefits in forging a consensus in public
affairs.
15–28: The second half of this poem, equal in length to the first half, is an extended
invocation to the goddess to appear, and it includes a list of places where the goddess
might be. It is typical of the hymnic style to attract the attention of the addressee by
calling to mind their favored locales, which often have specific cultic importance.
This is the significance of the mention of Kypros, one of her most important cult
sites and traditionally the place where she first stepped onto land after she was born.
The other locations broaden her associations. Olympos is mentioned first, as she is
naturally conceived above all as a Greek goddess. This also places her in the sky, and
the further mention of land and sea recalls the three realms over which Aphrodite
was earlier said to have dominion (lines 4–7). Syria points to her connection with the
Semitic goddess Astarte, already identified with Aphrodite by Herodotos (1.150),
while Egypt alludes to Isis. Aphrodite is included in a long list of deities identified
with Moon/Isis in Apuleius Metamorphoses or The Golden Ass 11.2 and 11.5, as well
as an even longer list in the first hymn to Isis by Isidoros (line 24, and note that the
Syrian Astarte appears in line 18).
20: Sappho imagines that the golden chariot of the goddess is pulled by sparrows
(fragment  1.8–10),  birds  that  were  considered  in  antiquity  to  be  particularly
promiscuous.
56. To Adonis
Adonis is an old Near Eastern divinity of vegetation and fertility. His name is derived
from the Semitic “adon” (“lord”), and he is a counterpart to the Babylonian Tammuz,
who is loved by a fertility goddess (Ishtar), dies an untimely death, and is ritually
lamented. Another similar figure is Attis, who is a lover of the great mother goddess
Kybele; see OH 27i. The worship of Adonis seems to have come first to Kypros and
from there to have spread to Greece. Therefore, not only his nature but also his earlier
sojourn to Kypros explains his special connection with Aphrodite (see OH 55i; for her
similarity with Ishtar, see Burkert 1985, p. 155). However, it appears that the Greeks, as
they often did with foreign imports, adapted Adonis and his worship to their own
mythological and religious framework. His Eastern connection is made clear by the
various  genealogies  given  by  Apollodoros  (3.13.3–4):  his  father  is  either  Phoinix,
Kinyras (a refugee from the East who became king of Kypros), or Theias, king of
Assyria. He is the product of an incestuous union between a father and his daughter,

named Myrrh or Smyrna, who is transformed into a myrrh tree out of which Adonis is
born (see also Antoninus Liberalis 34 and Ovid Metamorphoses 10.298–518; note that
the story in Ovid is narrated by Orpheus). Endowed with exquisite beauty, he catches
the eye of Aphrodite herself and becomes her paramour. In one account, Aphrodite is
already in love with Adonis as an infant. She places him in a chest and hands him over
to Persephone for safekeeping. Persephone also becomes enamored of the child and
later refuses to give him back to Aphrodite. They appeal to Zeus for a resolution. He
decrees that Adonis must spend one third of the year with Persephone, another third
with Aphrodite, and the remaining third with the goddess of his choice; he opts to spend
this third with Aphrodite. Thus Adonis, like Persephone, spends part of his time in the
land of death and the other part in the land of living, and, insofar as he is a god of
vegetation, this tale corroborates the dying of plant life in the sweltering heat of the
summer (see also OH 53i). The story is also reminiscent of the dispute between Hermes
and Apollon in the longer Homeric Hymn to Hermes (no. 4): the younger half-sibling
appropriating the property of the older one, their squabble, and the appeal to their
father, Zeus. As a young man, Adonis becomes quite fond of hunting, which eventually
leads to his death at the tusks of a wild boar. This boar is sometimes said to have been
sent by a jealous Ares (or is Ares himself disguised) or Artemis.
Adonis was worshipped by women throughout the Greek world, who would ritually
lament his death every year. Our earliest reference to the practice comes from Sappho
(fragment 140), but we know about it chiefly as it was practiced at Athens in the
Classical period. In the summer, seeds were sown in broken pots and taken to the roofs
of homes after the plants sprouted. There these “Gardens of Adonis” were left to wither
and die. The women loudly and expressively mourned the death of the god. They then
laid out figures representing Adonis in a symbolic burial and afterward disposed of the
“body” and the pots into the sea. For references and details of this practice, see Burkert
1985, pp. 176–177, and Larson 2007, p. 124. Theokritos devotes an entire idyll to an
elaborate festival at Alexandria (Idyll 15), and Lucian mentions the worship of Adonis at
Byblos, where the women at first mourn the dead Adonis and then celebrate his rebirth
(On the Syrian Goddess 6–7). The bucolic poet Bion (ca. 100 BC) wrote a Lament for
Adonis that blends myth with ritual content.
Our hymn alludes to this practice of lamenting Adonis in lines  and 6, and many of
the traditional features of the myth of Adonis are incorporated. He is a hunter (line 7),
and splits his time between life and death (lines 5, 10–11). He is repeatedly connected
with vegetation: his hair is emphasized (lines 2 and 7), he is an “unwithering bloom”
(line 4), the “spirit of growth” (line 6), and a “sweet blossom” (line 8). The emphasis,
though, is not on his death but on his rebirth (line 10–11), as it seems to have been at
Byblos. The similarities between Adonis and Dionysos have led to the identification of
the two gods in this hymn. Just like Dionysos, Adonis has the epithet “many-named”

(cf. OH 42.2, OH 45.2, OH 50.2+n, OH 52.1), is called Eubouleus (cf. OH 29.8, OH
30.6+n, OH 42.2, OH 52.4), is both male and female (cf. OH 30.2+n, OH 42.4), and
wears horns (cf. OH 30.3+n). They are both conceived as vegetation (see OH 50i+5n
and compare to lines 6 and 11 of this hymn). Furthermore, Dionysos is the “nursling” of
the Nymphs and Aphrodite elsewhere in the collection (see OH 46.2–3+n), while
Adonis in this hymn is the son of Aphrodite (see note to lines 8–9). He is also the son
of Persephone, just as Dionysos is (cf. OH 30.6–7 and OH 30.2–3n), although Dionysos
is also said to be reared by Persephone (see OH 46.6–7+n), just as Adonis is. This
identification is also attested by Plutarch, who mentions that some people consider
Adonis to be Dionysos (Quaestiones conviviales 671b).
4 you vanish and then shine again: Very similar phrasing is used of Sun at OH 8.15.
It is perhaps worth noting that Proclus in his hymn to Sun says that some people
identified this divinity with Adonis (1.26, and see van den Berg 2001, pp. 173–174).
Interestingly enough, Phaethon, who is usually the child of Sun, is made the son of
Kephalos and Dawn by Hesiod and then is snatched away by Aphrodite to be an
official in her temple (Theogony 986–991). Hesiod describes Phaethon as “a man of
god-like beauty” and “still in the tender blossom of luxuriant youth,” and it is not
hard to see how in later times the myths of Phaethon and Adonis might have
blended.  Indeed,  Apollodoros  lists  Phaethon  as  the  great-great-grandfather  of
Adonis,  and  the  full  patrilineal  genealogy  runs  Kephalos,  Tithonos,  Phaethon,
Astynous, Sandokos, Kinyras, and Adonis (3.14.3; granted, he cites Hesiod as a
source that Phoinix is the father of Adonis). It is therefore possible that our poet
(and Proclus) is alluding to an identification that was made in a work now lost to us.
6 spirit of growth: Asklepios is also described as such; see OH 67.5+n.
8–9: An interesting twist to the usual genealogy—one, however, that keeps the theme of
incest, insofar as Eros is the son of Aphrodite (see OH 55.8). That Persephone is also
the mother of Adonis is probably intended as a metaphor based on the return of
Adonis from the underworld every year, as well as allowing Adonis to be equated
with Dionysos.
57. To Chthonic Hermes
The first hymn to Hermes already hinted at the god's connection with the dead (OH
28.2), but this function has apparently taken a life of its own and achieved the status of
a (quasi-)separate divinity in this hymn. Much like Hades can be called Chthonic Zeus,
so here Chthonic Hermes is distinguished from Hermes, even though the two divinities
are not kept entirely independent of one another (cf. also OH 73i). The role of Hermes

as psukhopompos (guide of the souls) is well attested in the earliest Greek literature and
is punned in the Greek on line  (“psukhais pompos,” translated as “the souls you
bring”).  In  the Odyssey,  the  god  shepherds  the  souls  of  the  dead  suitors  to  the
underworld (24.1–14), and in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes, guiding the dead is listed
among the god's various functions (4.572). Hermes can also, when occasion calls for it,
lead out from the land of the dead, as he does Persephone in the Homeric Hymn to
Demeter (2.375–386). Hermes was also psukhopompos in Orphism (Orphic fragment
339), but it is curious that he is hardly mentioned in the extant sources and does not
appear at all on the Bacchic gold tablets. The silence might very well be because his role
is simply assumed. Perhaps, though, at least in some cases such as the gold tablets, the
middleman might have been purposely left out in favor of the initiate's soul proactively
(with the help of the instructions) taking matters into its own hands (thus further
differentiating the initiate from the uninitiated). Outside of Orphic cult, we find Hermes
worshiped as Chthonic Hermes in connection with pouring libations to the dead; for
details, see Burkert 1985, pp. 157–158, and Larson 2007, pp. 149–150. The hymn
seems oddly placed, but the explicit mention of Tartaros, Aphrodite, and Dionysos
(merged with Adonis in the previous hymn) appear to have been sufficient grounds for
its inclusion among the Aphrodite group.
1 the road of no return: This is normally true, but mythology is replete with heroic
and  divine  exceptions,  one  being  Adonis  as  seen  in  the  previous  hymn.  The
sentiment that one cannot return from Hades is a commonplace in Greek literature;
see, e.g., Anakreon PMG 395.
1 Kokytos: One of the rivers of the underworld, and where Melinoe was born; see OH
71.2+n.
3–5: The genealogy given here is unique in literature and quite different from the
conventional one as expressed at OH 28.1 (Zeus and Maia). It is also curious to find
Dionysos in particular as the father of Chthonic Hermes, since in literature and art
Hermes is at times depicted as bringing the newly-born infant Dionysos to the
nymphs of Nysa and/or Silenos (e.g., Apollodoros 3.4.3, Boardman 1989, pl. 126).
Hermes and Aphrodite are often linked in cult (see Burkert 1985, pp. 220–221), but
not as mother and son. The source and significance of this parentage of Chthonic
Hermes remains a puzzle. In any event, this makes Persephone, who gives him his
“high office” (line 9–10), his grandmother.
4 Paphian maiden: Paphos, a city on the island of Kypros, had one of the oldest and
most famous cult centers of Aphrodite.
6 destined harbor: Maybe a reference to Kharon, the one who conveys the dead across

a river to the underworld proper, if not a general metaphor for the land of the dead.
–8: The wand of Hermes is one of his most prominent attributes. Its ability to lull to
sleep and to awaken are already mentioned in Homer; in particular note Odyssey
24.2–5, where, after describing the powers of this wand, the poet shows Hermes
leading the souls of the dead with it. In our text the powers of sleep merge with the
powers of death; for the close connection of the two concepts in Greek thought, see
OH 85i. It is not clear what is intended in these lines. It may refer to the Orphic
belief that souls are reborn. Another possibility is that they refer to the initiate's
expectations in the afterlife—that it is in fact the prerogative of Chthonic Hermes, as
the agent of Persephone, to “awaken” those souls who have been put to “sleep” so
that they may find their way to their special place in the underworld, as the Bacchic
gold tablets describe.
58. To Eros
Eros, better known under his Latin name Cupid, has become a familiar figure in the
Western literary and iconographical tradition. He is the playful winged and cherubic
child, flitting around with his little bow and arrows, capriciously shooting the unwitting
and causing them to fall desperately in love—ofttimes, alas, with tragic effect. The
fanciful juxtaposition of great power with the even greater irresponsibility of a child
betrays a profound psychological insight in the experience of love that first takes root in
the earliest of the lyric poets; see the references in the note to line 3. Our hymn elects
not to ignore this poetic conceit but having paid sufficient homage to it, quickly passes
over to the other side of Eros, the cosmic force of love and attraction that is essential to
the chain of copulations that underlies the anthropomorphizing tales of creation. This
Eros is among the oldest divinities in Hesiod, coming after Khaos and coeval with Earth
and Tartaros (Theogony 116–122), and Sappho offers a similarly ancient pedigree by
making him the son of Earth and Sky (fragment 198). In Orphism, Eros is identified
with Protogonos, another primeval figure; see OH 6i+5–7n, and compare the mock
theogony in Aristophanes' Birds, where Eros' role is analogous to that of Protogonos in
Orphism (see OH 6.2n). It is perhaps a different Eros that becomes the companion to
Aphrodite after her birth (Orphic fragment 261; compare Hesiod Theogony 201–202),
and the father of Hygeia (with Persuasion her mother; see Orphic fragment 262 and
further OH 68i). However, in more conventional genealogies he is the son of Aphrodite,
as he is in our collection (OH 55.8), while the father is variously said to be Zeus,
Hermes, or Ares (if a father is even mentioned, which often is not the case). Another
account,  attributed  to  the  semi-legendary  Olen,  claims  that  Eros  was  the  son  of
Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth (see OH 2i). This is mentioned by Pausanias in his

brief description of the worship of Eros at Thespiai, and he notes a few other cult
centers (9.27.1–4). There is perhaps an allusion to Orphic myth in Simias' (early third
century BC) pattern poem Wings, where the winged child Eros is bearded and explains
this anomaly by referring to his great antiquity, claiming to have been born in the
earliest times when Necessity was in charge and denying to be the child of Aphrodite
and Ares. Ether and Khaos are also mentioned, although textual corruption makes it
difficult to know in what capacity. The poem ends with Eros describing his powers: he
rules with gentleness (implicitly contrasting himself favorably to Necessity) and the
earth, sea, and sky all yield to him. This assertion of wide-ranging power and the fusion
of the cosmic with the literary are quite similar to what we find in this hymn.
2 who runs swiftly on a path of fire
: The Greek word used here, “puridromos,” is also
used of the Stars (OH 7.9), Sun (OH 8.11), and Astrapaios Zeus (OH 20.2). It gives
Eros a celestial coloring, anticipating the transition from the chubby archer boy to
sublime cosmic power.
3 who plays together with gods and mortal men: The description of the power of
love as “play” occurs in early Greek lyric; see for example Alkman PMGF 58 and
Anakreon PMG 358. Anakreon PMG 357 is a mock prayer to Dionysos asking the
god to be a “good counselor” to Kleoboulos (with a pun on this name, which means
“famous for counsel”—and possibly also a play on Eubouleus, an alternate name of
Dionysos; see OH 41.8n). In this poem, Dionysos is described as playing with Eros,
nymphs, and Aphrodite. The poem was composed for a symposiastic setting, a
situation where wine and love frequently mingled. The setting is the same for Plato's
aptly named Symposium, where the nature of Eros is discussed (see also Plato's
Phaedrus).  A  natural  link  between  Eros  and  Dionysos  is  their  ability  to  cause
madness. Indeed, another fragment of Anakreon calls the dice of Eros “madness and
battle”  (PMG  398);  the  word  “battle”  is  Homeric,  and  Anakreon  is  probably
suggesting the Trojan War, whose immediate cause was passion. Apollonios of
Rhodes portrays Eros cheating at dice against Ganymede (Argonautika 3.111–130).
4 two-natured: Other divinities in the collection are two-natured (which probably refers
to their androgyny), the most relevant being Protogonos (OH 6.1+n), who is equated
with (the cosmic) Eros in Orphism (see the introduction to this hymn). Antagoras of
Rhodes (see the note to lines 5–7 below) employs a synonymous epithet. For other
androgynous divinities in the collection, see OH 9.4n.
5–7: Compare the geographical extent with Aphrodite's at OH 55.4–7; for this theme
elsewhere in the collection, see OH 10.14–16n. The reference to the underworld (“of
all that lies in Tartaros”) perhaps is intended to recall Orpheus' charming of Hades
and Persephone when he descended to their realm in order to bring back his beloved

Eurydike; see OH 87.9n and cf. Ovid Metamorphoses 5.359–384 and 10.25–29. The
“goddess of grass and grain” is probably either Demeter or Persephone—more likely
the latter, if our poet had in mind Kleanthes' play on the name Persephone as warm
air (see OH 29.15–16n). The mention of winds is interesting. In Aristophanes'
account of the birth of Eros from an egg in the Birds, the egg is a wind-egg (line
695) and Eros is described as being like the swift whirlwinds (line 697). The choice
of a wind-egg may just be a joke on Aristophanes' part, playing off the incongruity
of one thing being born out of another that is unproductive by nature. However, in at
least one version of Orphic myth, the parents of Eros are Time and all the winds
(Orphic fragment 360), and Sappho's younger contemporary Alkaios said that Eros
was the son of Iris (Rainbow) and Zephyros, the west wind (see OH 81i). A later
poet, Antagoras of Rhodes (early third century BC) in a literary hymn to Eros frankly
expresses his puzzlement as to the god's parentage. He lists four possibilities: (1)
Erebos and Night (alluding to Aristophanes' comic account), (2) Aphrodite, (3)
Earth, and (4) the winds. See further the discussion at West 1983, pp. 200–201.
59. To the Fates
The Fates (Greek Moirai) are three sisters who were thought to be responsible for
certain immutable facts about the cosmos. Sometimes they are merged into the notion
of a singular personified abstraction Fate. The word “moira” means “lot, portion.”
When the early Greeks felt the need to explain why things happened to them the way
they did, they cast their questions in terms of a personal “who is giving this” rather than
an abstract “what is causing this,” and the Fates are an answer to the question of who is
doing the giving; compare the concept of a daimōn (OH 73i). They thus represent what
is allotted in life, the portion of life one receives. That this does not necessarily entail
“preordained destiny” can be seen in the Iliad, where Akhilleus has a choice whether to
return home, where he will live to a ripe old age but die unknown, or to return to battle,
where he will die young but earn immortal glory (9.410–416). Euchenor, son of the seer
Polyidos, had a somewhat similar choice: to stay home and die of sickness or to go to
Troy and be killed by the Trojans (Iliad 13.663–670). In Plato's “Myth of Er,” the souls
about to be reborn are able to choose their next life, which is ratified by the Fates only
after the choice is made (Republic 617d–621a). The idea that the Fates apportion
destinies is a specific instance of the more general idea of apportioning limits on a
cosmic level. The Fates also are the limits of the physical universe, and, since for the
Greeks very often the physical structure of the world is also an ethical one, the Fates
also delimit moral boundaries (see note to lines 8–10). In this connection, their role is
sometimes  expanded  to  being  the  protectors  of  these  limits,  punishing  those  who

transgress the established boundaries, i.e., those who commit hubris. They are thus
aligned with other divinities in our collection who are also concerned with maintenance
of the cosmic order, such as Nemesis (OH 61), Justice (OH 63), Nomos (OH 64), and
the Eumenides (OH 70). Most of all, though, they overlap with the Erinyes (OH 69),
who in their hymn are actually called the Fates (translated “goddesses of fate” in line ;
see note).
In Hesiod, the Fates are the daughters of Zeus and Themis (Theogony 904–906), and
this relationship symbolically marks them as part of the divine order, just as it does with
their sisters, the Seasons (see OH 43i). Of course, the divine order existed before
Themis became a wife of Zeus, and Hesiod gives the alternate account that Night bore
the Fates parthenogentically (Theogony 217–222; see also OH 61i). In this genealogy,
the order they represent is an essential part of the development of the world. Orphic
accounts also make the Fates the daughters of earlier generations. They are born from
the “first gods” (Orphic fragment 176) or, along with the Hundred-Handers and the
Kyklopes, are the children of Earth and Sky (Orphic fragment 82). The Kretan seer
Epimenides makes them the daughters of Kronos and says their sisters are the Erinyes
and Aphrodite (fragment 51). This last detail is interesting, not only because of the
close relationship between the Erinyes and Fates already described but also in light of
the fact that our hymn seems to be part of a grouping of divinities explicitly linked to
Aphrodite  (OH  55–60).  We  find  the  Fates  and  Aphrodite  connected  elsewhere.
Pausanias reports an inscription he saw in Athens which claimed that Aphrodite was the
oldest of the Fates (1.19.2).
Our composer seems to have followed the Hesiodic version making Night the mother
of the Fates. However, elsewhere in the collection, Night is called Kypris, another name
of Aphrodite (see OH 3.2+n). This would further explain why the hymn to the Fates has
been included among other figures connected with this goddess (see also OH 55i).
Moreover, the “necessity” in line 18 of this hymn could possibly be understood as a
personification. In this case, Aphrodite as “mother of Necessity” (see OH 55.3+n)
would then be the mother of the Fates, thus reinforcing the equivalence between herself
and Night.
3–4: The imagery used here is obscure. Those who dwell in caves near bodies of water
are usually beings with definite chthonic connections, as, for example, the Erinyes in
OH 69.3–4. Furthermore, the Fates themselves, called “daughters of Night” in line 1,
are explicitly given chthonic coloring in this hymn. Here, however, it is clear that the
location is celestial (see also OH 7.9n). The lake and the cave may have been
imagined to be on Mount Olympos. Another possibility, though, is that the Fates are
here being connected with the moon. This would certainly resolve the apparent
contradiction, for the moon, while clearly a celestial body, nevertheless had strong

chthonic ties. It was associated with Persephone, and indeed was sometimes thought
to be the Isle of the Blest (for example, by Pythagoras; see Iamblichus Life  of
Pythagoras 82) or where souls went after death (see Plutarch De facie quae in orbe
lunae apparet 942d–945d). The stars, too, could also be linked with souls (see OH
7.9n). In the lost poem Peplos (Robe), attributed to Orpheus, our source says that the
Fates were allegorized as parts of the moon (with a wordplay here on the meaning of
“moira,” “portion”). Furthermore, the Fates are said to be “clothed in white” insofar
as they are parts of the moon's light (Orphic fragment 407). It should be noted that
the word here translated as “frozen” (Greek “leukos”) literally means “white,” a color
that is sometimes used to describe moonlight. In the magical papyri, Moon is
identified with the threads of the Fates (PGM 4.2795) and the singular being Fate
(PGM 4.2861). It is true that celestial bodies were often thought to be composed of
fire, but the moon was sometimes considered to be a mixture of fire and air—a view
held by, among others, the Stoics (Plutarch De facie quae in orbe lunae apparet
921f), who thought that air froze water (Plutarch De primo frigido 949b–c)—and for
Empedokles the moon was frozen air that had been separated from fire (Plutarch De
facie quae in orbe lunae apparet 922c). It is possible then that our poet is allusively
conveying the notion that the Fates dwell on the moon, and perhaps there is an
intentional playing on the idea found in “Peplos” that the Fates are the moon.
–6: Similarly, Nomos is imagined as having descended from the heavens to bring laws
to the human race (OH 64.5).
6–7: The idea being expressed here seems to be that even the best-laid plans are
worthless  if  the  Fates  do  not  grant  fulfillment.  In  Aeschylus' Agamemnon,
Kassandra's last words before she goes offstage to her death are: “Ah, the fortunes of
men. If all is going well,/a mere shadow may darken them all. But if they already
fare poorly,/a wet sponge wipes the writing away,/and this I find to be the more
pitiful” (1327–1330). The idea of personal destiny and personal fortune are closely
related; see OH 72i.
8–10: These lines represent the idea that the Fates are antecedent to such abstractions as
justice, hope, law, and order. These concepts are thus derivative of the physical and
moral structure of the cosmos which the Fates embody and are thus responsible for
maintaining (see also OH 8.16n and OH 64i). However, the Greek word “doxa,” here
translated as “glory,” may also have the meaning “(fallible) opinion, fancy.” Under
this reading, the word would have the connotation of self-delusion, with the chariot
thus symbolizing the human drive to believe oneself capable of transgressing certain
fixed limits (i.e., it would be symbolic of what the Greeks called “atē,” “blind
infatuation, ruin,” which leads to hubris). The Fates' “march toward men” in line 
would then be with punitive intent, and the following lines would pick up the idea
that unjust acts can never go unnoticed. See also OH 61.6–7+n. Of course, our
composer could be playing on both meanings of the word.
–14: For the eye of Zeus, see OH 62.1+n. The Fates, in addition to sometimes being
the daughters of Zeus, are found together with him in cultic contexts. In Thebes, a
sanctuary of the Fates was in close proximity to one of Zeus and another of Themis
(Pausanias 9.25.4), thus recalling one of the Hesiodic genealogies. Zeus is sometimes
worshipped as Moiragetes (Leader of Fates). He appears with the Fates in a relief on
an altar to Persephone (Pausanias 8.37.1), and an altar probably belonging to him is
near an altar to the Fates at Elis (Pausanias 5.15.5). The “Zeus' mind [noos]” is
comparable to the Stoic Khrysippos' equation of the reason [logos] of Zeus with that
which has been fated (Plutarch De Stoicorum repugnantiis 1056c), and, according to
the author of the Derveni Papyrus, Orpheus called Fate “phronēsis,” which might
mean “thought” or “prudence” (see Betegh 2004, p. 39, for translation and pp. 200–
202 for discussion).
16: These names are already in Hesiod (Theogony 905) and are standard in Greek myth.
Klotho is the Spinner, Lakhesis the Alotter, and Atropos the Irreversible. They
reflect the notion that every life is like a thread that Klotho provides, Lakhesis
measures out (see also OH 61i), and Atropos cuts at the moment of death. This
metaphor of the “thread of life” persisted throughout antiquity and indeed has
continued into our own times.
17 airy, invisible: The Erinyes are also described this way (OH 69.9).
18  necessity:  For  the  figure  of  Necessity  in  Orphic  thought,  see OH  55.3n.  An
important quality of the Fates is their inevitably (compare “inexorable” in line 17 and
the meaning of the name Atropos), and thus they are often associated with Necessity
who shares the same fixity. The Stoic Khrysippos equated Atropos with Pepromene
(Destiny), Necessity, and Adrasteia (Plutarch De  Stoicorum  repugnantiis 1056c).
Adrasteia is sometimes identified with Necessity, and sometimes with Nemesis, a
divinity who overlaps somewhat with the Fates (see OH 61i). In Plato's “Myth of
Er,” the Fates are daughters of Necessity, and they turn the spindle that Plato
portrays as the framework of the cosmos (Republic 616c–617d).
In the manuscripts, the last line of this hymn reads: “This is the end of the song of
the Fates, which Orpheus composed.” It is a dactylic hexameter line, the same meter
used in all of the hymns in the collection. It is possible that it was part of the original
composition, although it is difficult to see why only this hymn asserts its Orphic
authorship. The explicit mention of Orpheus perhaps is meant to distinguish it from

another  hymn  to  the  Fates,  now  lost  to  us,  which  was  not  by  Orpheus  (or  even
mistakenly attributed to him). On the other hand, it might be that this hymn was
separate from the collection and was later added, due to its similarity to the other
hymns; the line could have been part of the original and simply retained. Then again, it
might simply be the work of a playful scribe engaging in a little poetic license. In this
scenario, the line would have been a marginal note that eventually was misunderstood to
have been part of the hymn and appended to its end. The word translated “composed”
literally means “wove.” While the metaphor of weaving a song is very old in Greek
literature (Bacchylides 5.9), it is perhaps more than a coincidence that it was chosen for
a hymn dedicated to divinities who are also closely connected with the metaphor of
weaving (see note to line ).
60. To the Graces
The Graces (Greek Kharites) are a plurality of female divinities concerned with beauty,
merriment, and good cheer. Aglaia is Splendor, Thalia Festivity, and Euphrosyne Joy,
and their names are indicative of their function. They are frequently connected, and
even  confused,  with  the  Seasons  (see OH 43i). There is  also some linguistic  and
conceptual overlap between this hymn and the one to the Seasons. Like the latter, the
Graces are “ever-blooming,” the third one listed is “(thrice-)blessed,” flowers are used
to describe their physical beauty, and both groups are called on to bring fertility. The
affinity between these two groups is made even more concrete since the mother of the
Graces is Eunomia, one of the Seasons. This differs from the Hesiodic account, where
they are also daughters of Zeus, but their mother is Eurynome, one of the daughters of
Okeanos (Theogony 907–911). The Orphic Rhapsodies, however, agree with our hymn
(Orphic fragment 254). For other variations of their names and genealogy, see Pausanias
9.35.1–7. Of particular interest is his mention of mysteries that were performed near
their statue at the entrance of the Athenian acropolis (9.35.3). Euripides recounts that
they were sent by Zeus along with the Muses to mollify Kybele-Demeter, who was
angry at the abduction of her daughter Persephone (Helen 1338–1345; see OH 27i). The
Graces are especially associated with Aphrodite. In the Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite
5.60–64 they are the goddess' attendants. In the Iliad Diomedes pierces Aphrodite's
robe, which was the handiwork of the Graces (5.337–338). Zeus orders Aphrodite to
“pour grace around [Pandora's] head,” and in the actual decking out of Pandora, the
Graces themselves with the goddess Persuasion hang golden necklaces around her neck,
while the Seasons crown her with a garland of spring flowers (Hesiod Works and Days
65 and 73–75). According to Pausanias, there was a sanctuary of the Graces at Elea
where there were images of the goddesses—one holding a rose, another a die, the third

a sprig of myrtle—and a statue of Eros next to them (6.24.6–7). Pausanias interprets
this group by noting the symbolism of the rose and myrtle for Aphrodite and pointing
out that young people, who are not yet marred by the ugliness of age, often play at dice.
The Graces' close association with Aphrodite helps to explain why their hymn follows
on the heels of hymns dedicated to this goddess (OH 55) and to those explicitly
connected  with  her:  Adonis,  Chthonic  Hermes,  and  Eros  (OH  56–58).  For  the
connection of the Fates with Aphrodite, see OH 59i. The Fates and the Graces are
further bound together by way of their mother Eunomia, whose name means “law-
abiding.” As her daughters, the Graces are part of that divine order in which their
mother partakes (see OH 43i) and that is exemplified by the Fates (see OH 59i) and
those goddesses to whom the subsequent hymns are dedicated: Nemesis, Dike (another
Season, and so one of their aunts!), Justice, and Nomos (OH 61–64).
61. Hymn to Nemesis
Nemesis is another personified abstraction that became deified. Her name comes from
the verb “nemō,” “I deal out, distribute.” She is the goddess of righteous indignation,
who punishes those who transgress customs and laws. Hesiod makes her the daughter of
Night (born from no father) and describes her as a “woe for mortals” (Theogony 223–
234). A more positive portrayal of this goddess appears in the conclusion to his account
of the Iron Race of men. There is so much wickedness in the world that Nemesis
apparently gives the human race up and leaves with Aidos (Shame) to Olympos (Works
and Days 197–201). Both indignation and shame were important forces in early society
that helped prevent unjust deeds and consequently contributed to constructing a stable
community. Hesiod subtly links Nemesis and Dike in the Works and Days, since Dike,
too, leaves the earth in the face of wicked acts; she rushes to her father, Zeus, to
demand punishment against those who have mistreated her (Works and Days 256–262;
see also OH 62i and OH 69.9n).
Nemesis is connected with the Trojan War in an interesting variant. Zeus falls in love
with her, but she flees his advances, out of shame and indignation (the words “aidos”
and “nemesis” are used), since Zeus is her father. With the god in hot pursuit, she keeps
changing herself into different animals, desperate to escape. Zeus catches up to her
when she is in the form of a goose, and he mates with her in the form of a swan.
Nemesis lays an egg, which is given to Leda, queen of Sparta, and out of the egg
hatches Helen. The death and destruction that result in the war for her sake are thus
connected with the righteous anger of Nemesis at the abuse of her father. For versions
of this story, see Kypria fragment 7 (= Athenaios 8.334b–d), Apollodoros 3.10.7, and
Pausanias 1.33.7; see also OH 79i. Other goddesses also become wrathful at such forced

unions, e.g., Demeter at Poseidon (see OH 69i), and Persephone at Zeus (see OH 29i
and OH 71.4–5+n).
This myth is reflected  in the cult  of Nemesis at Rhamnous,  a town in Attika.
Pausanias describes a statue by the famous sculptor Pheidias (modern scholars prefer to
attribute  it  to  his  pupil  Agorakritos)  depicting  Leda  leading  Helen  to  her  mother
Nemesis; also depicted is Leda's husband, Tyndareus, with their children, as well as
Agamemnon, Menelaos, Neoptolemos and Hermione, the daughter of Helen (1.33.8).
The statue was built from marble that the Persians had arrogantly brought with them in
their invasion of Attika, with the intent to build a trophy for the victory they felt
inevitable; thus the goddess became explicitly connected with their defeat (Pausanias
1.33.2). The statue held an apple branch in its left hand and a libation bowl in its right
(engraved with Ethiopians); on its head was a deer and images of Nike. The symbolism
of Nike is clearly connected with the defeat of the Persians. The apple branch suggests
fertility connections, maybe even a connection with Aphrodite, while the deer perhaps
hints at Artemis or some other similar ancient mistress of animals; see Larson 2007, pp.
179–180. Themis had a shrine in Nemesis' sanctuary (see OH 79i). Nemesis was also
worshipped at Smyrna, where the abstraction becomes a plurality of three Nemeses
(Pausanias 7.5.3).
It is interesting that the Fates are placed before Nemesis in Hesiod's list of Night's
progeny and that they are the ones who he says look over the deeds of mortals and gods
and  punish  transgressions  (Theogony  220–222).  This  is  normally  the  purview  of
Nemesis. However, for the Greeks the ideas of justice and fate were intertwined in the
cosmic order, so it is not surprising that at times divinities concerned with one of these
should be concerned with the other as well (see OH 59i). Nemesis was sometimes called
Adrasteia (Ineluctable) and invoked apotropaically before one would say something that
could be construed as boasting or otherwise overbold (see, e.g., Aeschylus Prometheus
Bound 936 and Plato Republic 451a). Adrasteia can function like Fate, too, and later is
equated with Necessity; see West 1983, pp. 194–196. Nemesis became associated also
with  Tyche;  compare  lines  –8  of  the  second  century AD  hymn  to  Nemesis  by
Mesomedes:  “Beneath  your  wheel  that  neither  ceases  nor  remains  on  the  beaten
track/there rolls the bright Tyche of men” and OH 72. Mesomedes further develops the
idea of Nemesis as Fate through the image of scales (line 1, “O Nemesis, winged scales
of life,” and line 13, “with scales in hand”) and the symbolism of measuring (line 11,
“you measure out livelihood”; cf. Lakhesis the “allotter” at OH 59.16+n). This close
relation probably influenced the placement of this hymn near the one dedicated to the
Fates, and, insofar as Aphrodite is called “mother of Necessity” (OH 55.3), Nemesis
could very well have been imagined as part of the Aphrodite block of hymns. The
intimate  bond  between  justice  and  the  indignation  that  arises  against  those  who
transgress it further explains the grouping of this hymn with the three that follow it. The

importance of acting in accordance to justice is thus emphasized. The first and last of
the four (OH 64, to Nomos) are marked by their lack of offering, and it is likely that the
initiates paused in their sacrifices and merely sang to these divinities. There is further a
possible male/female pairing implied between Nemesis and Nomos (see OH 14.8–9n),
whose names, incidentally, are etymologically related. The other two hymns sandwiched
in between address the closely related pair of Dike and Justice. The themes of the
blessings of justice and the inevitable punishment of the unjust unite all four and
connect these figures with similar deities, namely, the Fates (OH 59), the Erinyes (OH
69), and the Eumenides (OH 70).
2 all-seeing eye: Similarly in line 8. A number of addressees in the collection are
described in this way. The most relevant parallel is Dike (OH 62.1); see further OH
8.1n.
4: This line does not mean that Nemesis is herself inconsistent, arbitrary, or fickle. It is
the wickedness of men that is so varied, and this entails that the principle embodied
by Nemesis must appear differently in her various concrete manifestations. Compare
the story of her flight from Zeus, where she is a shapeshifter. The line also fits in
with the theme of deities who are multiform and ever-changing.
5: Fear as a motivation to act justly was recognized early on by the Greeks. An
astounding witness to the fact is the fragment from the late fifth-century tragedy (or
satyr play) Sisyphos, sometimes attributed to Euripides. In the fragment, the lead
character baldly states that gods were invented merely as a means to frighten people
into behaving themselves; cf. OH 69.15n.
6–7 the arrogant soul, / the reckless one: Transgression is properly a going beyond the
bounds of what is allowed and/or appropriate, and the Greeks were very concerned
about respecting boundaries and maintaining proper limits; see OH 63.7n and cf. OH
30i. This idea lies at the heart of the concept of hubris, a word not used in our hymn
but found in Mesomedes' (line 5: “hating destructive hubris of mortals”). See also
OH 59.8–10+n.
8 you arbitrate all: Compare line 14 of Mesomedes' hymn, where Nemesis is invoked
as a judge, and the idea of Nemesis as Fate as noted in the introduction to this hymn.
62. To Dike
Dike (Right) is not really different from Justice in the next hymn, whose name in Greek
(Dikaiosunē) is derived from Dike's (see OH 63i). For Hesiod, she is one of the three
Seasons and a daughter of Zeus and Themis (Theogony 901–903). She receives special

attention in the Works  and  Days where she is represented as a maiden who takes
vengeance on the unjust, particularly in juridical matters, whether she takes punishment
into her own hands (220–224) or complains to her father, Zeus (256–262; see also OH
61i and OH 69.9n). Note that the word “dikē” in Greek can also mean “punishment.”
Orphism adopts the Hesiodic genealogy (Orphic fragment 252) but adds a second one,
making Dike the daughter of Nomos (Law; to whom OH 64 is addressed) and Eusebeia
(Piety); see also OH 63i. Mesomedes in his hymn to Nemesis makes her the daughter of
Dike; here genealogy reflects function. Finally, Dike is equated with Moon in the
magical papyri (PGM 4.2785 and 2860), in the same context as the Fates and the
Erinyes, both of whom also have as their function the punishment of malefactors; see
also OH 69.15n.
1 all-seeing eye
: So, too, Nemesis in the previous hymn (OH 61.2). The idea of the “eye
of Dike” goes as far back at least to Sophokles (fragment 12). The imagery occurs in
our collection again at OH 69.15, where the Erinyes are said to “gaze as the eye of
Dike.” Two gods who are traditionally watchers in the sky are also so described in
the collection. Sun is addressed as the “eternal eye that sees all” (OH 8.1+n), as well
as Apollon in his identity as the sun god (OH 34.8). Sometimes, the eye of the sun is
limited to just the physical entity, though, as at OH 11.17. Zeus, too, possesses an
all-seeing eye. In the hymn to the Fates, the poet says that they alone of the gods
watch over mortals “except for Zeus' perfect eye” (OH 59.13). In the Works and
Days, Zeus has an eye that sees all (267); this comes shortly after Hesiod describes
how Dike runs to tell him of the injustice of the world. Note, too, that in an Orphic
hymn to Zeus, the sun and moon are said to be his eyes (Orphic fragment 243.16).
The  imagery  of  a  celestial  sky  god  who  perceives  all  is  very  ancient  and  its
appearance in Greek poetry seems to have roots in its Indo-European heritage (see
West 1978, pp. 223–224). Dike, too, can be construed as a celestial goddess. Aratos
tells us that the constellation known as the Maiden is either the daughter of Astraios
or is Dike herself. He then relates the story of how Dike had dwelt among men
during the innocence of the Golden Age and urged them to righteousness; in the
Silver Age, disgusted with the wickedness she found in the people, she retreated
from society and warned men of their evil ways; and finally in the Bronze Age she
could no longer bear to remain on the earth, so she retired to the sky where she
became a constellation (Phainomena 96–136). This story appears to have been
influenced by Hesiod's account of Dike leaving the earth to complain to her father.
2: For the concept of Dike sharing the throne of Zeus, compare Hesiod Works and Days
256–262,  Sophokles Oedipus  at  Kolonos  1382,  and  the  introduction  to  the
translation.  She  is  described  as  a  companion  and  follower  of  Zeus  in  Orphic
literature (Orphic fragment 32–33, 233, and 247–248). Her daughter Nemesis is said

to sit by her in Mesomedes' hymn to Nemesis (line 18).
6–7: The concern for verdicts is reminiscent of the Hesiod passages in the Works and
Days, cited in the introduction to this hymn. The word “dikē” can also have the sense
of “judgment, trial, suit.”
9: Depicted on the chest of Kypselos, as described by Pausanias (5.18.2), is Dike, in the
form of a beautiful woman, both choking and whacking with a staff an ugly woman,
who is Adikia (Wrong). The idea that Dike is nice to her friends and nasty to her
enemies reflects an ethic that goes back to Archaic times. A similar sentiment is
found in OH 10.15, right after Physis is identified with Dike; cf. also OH 63.10.
63. To Justice
Justice (Dikaiosunē) was one of the most important, if not the most important, virtues
in Greek ethical thought, often discussed by poets and philosophers. There is a certain
amount of overlap between this word and “dikē,” and the two words may function as
synonyms. One distinction between Dike and Justice in their portrayals here is that the
former has a somewhat more concrete personalization while the latter is presented more
as an abstract entity (but cf. OH 8.18, where Sun is called the “eye of justice,” and OH
62.1n). Justice also seems to be more broadly construed; see note to lines 14–15. We do
find Justice personified and worshipped, although it is rare. Euripides is our earliest
source for the personification. He mentions the “golden countenance of Justice” in his
lost play Melanippe (fragment 486). An inscription on Delos from 115/114 BC identifies
Isis with Justice as well as Tyche, Protogoneia (a feminine form of Protogonos, First-
Born), Thalia (the name of one of the Graces that means “joy”), and Aphrodite the
Righteous. Another inscription from Epidauros in the second century AD confirms that
Justice received worship there. In Orphic theogony, Nomos (Law) and Eusebeia (Piety)
are said to have given birth to Justice (Orphic fragment 248), and it is therefore notable
that in the opening address to Mousaios both Justice and Piety are mentioned together
(OH O.14). However, Hermias, the source for this genealogy, in the same work also says
it is Dike who is their daughter. Whether he thought they were two distinct entities or he
is  using  the  names  interchangeably  is  hard  to  determine.  To  make  matters  more
complicated, Hermias again in the same work says that there are three Nights in Orphic
mythology and that the third one gave birth to Justice (Orphic fragment 246). And
another source says that, for Orpheus, Dike was a daughter of Zeus and Themis and that
she was one of the Seasons (see OH 43i). These might represent different variants that
developed independently over time and that are being indiscriminately used by later
authors. However, as the multiple Nights show, it is possible that a single entity could be

duplicated in Orphic mythopoetics. Clearly the notion of justice was as important to the
Orphics as it was to the wider Greek world.
7 the balance of your mighty scale
s: Balance, equality, and fairness are important
themes in this hymn; they also recur in the other three of the group. An important
component in the Greek view of justice was that each person receives what they
deserve; injustice occurs when the undeserving take more than their fair share (a
form of hubris) and the deserving are short-changed. In section 29 of The Theology
of Arithmetic (see OH 12.3n), the author says that the Pythagoreans considered the
tetrad (i.e., the number four) to be Justice, because a square that had sides the length
of four would have its area (length times width: 4 × 4 = 16) and its perimeter (four
sides of 4 = 16) equal (Waterfield 1988, p. 63). In the Pythagorean saying “Do not
step over the beam,” the “beam” was sometimes construed as the beam of a balance,
and the dictum was interpreted as meaning that one should not transgress against
justice (see Iamblichus Life of Pythagoras 186 and The Theology of Arithmetic 40 in
Waterfield 1988, p. 72).
8 a lover of revel: This would seem to refer to Dionysian ecstatic worship and to
suggest that it receives Justice's stamp of approval.
14–15: It is interesting that the hymn now includes living creatures in addition to human
beings.  Hitherto  this  hymn,  as  well  as  the  previous  two,  has  been  exclusively
concerned with human conduct; see further OH 64i. It is perhaps relevant to recall in
this context that Hesiod tells Perses to “obey the voice of Dike and always refrain
from violence” and then continues, “This is the law [nomos] Zeus laid down for
men,/but fish and wild beasts and winged birds/know not of justice [dikē] and so eat
one another./Justice [dikē], the best thing there is, he gave to men” (Works and Days
276–279).
15 sea-dwelling Zeus: A circumlocution for Poseidon; compare Hades being called
“Chthonic Zeus” (see OH 18.3+n).
64. Hymn to Nomos
This ends a sequence of four tightly integrated hymns. As with OH 61, there is no
indication of incense, which suggests this was perhaps sung without being accompanied
by any other ritual activity; together they mark the beginning and end of the series. A
crescendo effect is achieved by the scope of each hymn. The first two, the hymns to
Nemesis and Dike, are limited to the various races of men (cf. OH 61.2 and OH 62.3).
The third hymn to Justice also is concerned with human justice, but at the very end

expands to include all living creatures (OH 63.14–15+n). All three divinities are female,
and their concern is with things that are alive. In this hymn, the male Nomos (Law) has
been raised to a cosmic principle that sees to it that both the inanimate elements of
nature and the creatures that live among them keep to their proper limits. This connects
the  hymn  conceptually  to  the  previous  three,  as  respecting  boundaries  is  a  core
component of Greek ethical thought (see OH 61.6–7n and OH 63.7n). The hymn is
structured to reflect the cosmos-human duality. The first part expresses Nomos as the
physical order of the universe (lines –4). A transitional bridge brings Nomos down to
earth—literally (lines 5–6). The focus is then on Nomos as a foundational ethical force
for living beings in general and the individual in particular (lines 7–11). This notion that
the underlying structure of the cosmos is as ethical as it is physical and that this
universal ethic is connected to moral action in the human sphere returns to a theme
found in the earlier hymns (see OH 8.16n) and appears again near the end (see OH 86i);
see also OH 59.8–10n and OH 69.15n.
The earliest evidence for the personification of Nomos is Pindar fragment 169a.1–4,
which is cited by Plato (Gorgias 484b). Nomos as a divinity seems to have been
appealing to the philosophers. A fragment of Herakleitos says that “all human laws
[nomoi] are nourished by the one that is divine” (Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983, no.
250), which might imply that for him Nomos was a divinity. The Stoics, who were
influenced greatly by Herakleitos, do explicitly recognize him as such. Philodemus tells
us that the Stoic philosopher Khrysippos recognized “the sun, the moon, and the other
stars as gods ... as well as law (nomos)” (On Piety 11); compare lines 2–4 of this hymn.
Philodemus  also  tells  us  that  Khrysippos  said  Zeus  was  Nomos  (On  Piety  14).
Kleanthes, an earlier Stoic philosopher, in his hymn to Zeus describes him as “steering
everything with Nomos” (line 2); the same metaphor (albeit with different wording) is
found in line 8 of this hymn. In Orphic thought, Nomos was also considered a god. He
is the father to Dike and/or Justice (Orphic fragment 248; see OH 63i), and he sits next
to the enthroned Zeus, who has Dike as a companion (Orphic fragment 247). This last
idea is very similar to that expressed by Kleanthes.
1 holy lord of men and gods: This is very similar to the opening of Pindar fragment
169a: “Nomos, the king of all men and gods” (lines 1–2).
2–4: Compare this to Pan, who is conceived as the force that keeps the four elements
separate (OH 11.13–18); see also OH 10.14–16n.
4 nature's balance: The sense of balance here has the connotation of stability; cf. OH
63.7+n and 9.
6 he drives out malicious envy: We find the same phrasing in Mesomedes' hymn to
Nemesis (line 6).

65. To Ares
Ares, the god of war, is the son of Hera and Zeus (Hesiod Theogony  921–923).
Although Athene is also concerned with war (see OH 32i), she represents the strategic,
intellectual side, while Ares portrays the blood-and-guts aspect. In literature, the two are
sometimes brought together in sharp contrast. They fight against each other in epic
poetry, whether directly (Iliad 21.391–414) or through a heroic proxy. Athene gives
direct assistance to Diomedes when he attacks Ares (Iliad 5.755–863), and she helps
Herakles in his battle against Kyknos (the son of Ares) and Ares himself (Hesiod Shield
433–466). Athene employs reason in trying to restrain Ares' anger at the death of one of
his mortal sons on two occasions, further emphasizing the gulf between intelligence and
pure battle rage (Iliad 15.100–142 and Hesiod Shield 446–449). The ancient Greeks in
general had a strong distaste for the violence of war, and the negative treatment of Ares
in myth is a reflection of this. The sons of Aloeus, Otos and Ephialtes, capture him,
place him in chains, and keep him in a cauldron for thirteen months; Hermes eventually
has to rescue him (Iliad 5.385–391). Zeus himself harshly rebukes him when he returns
to Olympos fresh after being wounded by Diomedes (Iliad 5.888–898). Ares is often
associated with aggressive figures who are threats to civilization, such as the Amazons.
However, there is a positive side to Ares as well. In the Iliad, being called a “servant of
Ares” (2.110), a “scion of Ares” (2.540), and the like is a mark of approval and praise.
Ares is also a figure of masculine beauty; for example, Sappho praises a bridegroom as
being as handsome as Ares (fragment 111). When the gods sing and dance, Ares also
takes part (Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.186–206). The ambiguity of his position in the
Greek pantheon may be seen symbolically in his children with Aphrodite (Hesiod
Theogony 933–937). Their two sons are Fear and Panic. They are often portrayed as
driving the chariot of their father, and they rescue him from Herakles after Kyknos is
slain. Their daughter, on the other hand, is Harmonia, the embodiment of civil concord
(see also OH 55i). The legendary foundation of Thebes also reflects Ares' ambiguity.
Kadmos slays a dragon who is either an offspring or favorite of Ares. The teeth of the
dragon  are  sown,  and  immediately  armed  warriors  sprout  out  of  the  earth  and
commence fighting. Only five survive the savage fray, and these five become the
forefathers of the five noble houses of Thebes. After this, though, Kadmos marries
Ares' daughter Harmonia, and the city is founded. Cults involving Ares are few; see
Larson 2007, pp. 156–157, for details. Another war god, Enyalios, who interestingly
had a female counterpart named Enyo, was eventually merged with Ares, although
traces of independent cult still survived; see OH 76i.
As Ares is a god who controls war, he also can perforce control peace in the sense
that he can prevent war from breaking out in the world (compare line 6). Our hymn is
divided into two parts that clearly play on these two sides. The violent and bloody nature

of the god is given adequate expression in the first five lines; the hymn does not shirk
from admitting this aspect of the god. Yet he is asked to transform himself into an agent
of peace in the final four lines. This follows the pattern found in many of the other
hymns in the collection: a divinity who has the potential to wreak great harm is asked
propitiously to manifest themselves in their beneficial guise. This hymn should be read
in conjunction with the Homeric Hymn  to  Ares, which most likely dates from the
Hellenistic period or later, possibly even composed by Proclus; see West 1970. For the
placement of this hymn with the following one to Hephaistos, compare line 10 of the
address  to  Mousaios.  After  the  digression  from  the  hymn  to  Aphrodite  to  four
abstractions  concerned  with  order  and  law  (OH  61–64),  we  return  to  two  major
Olympian deities who are both sons of Zeus and who both have associations with
Aphrodite. The relationship between peace and justice connects this particular hymn
with the previous four and eases the transition.
5 rude clash
: The word for rude, “amouson,” literally means “without the Muses.” The
activities of these goddesses are intricately bound up with peace (see OH 76i),
although Ares, as mentioned in the introduction to this hymn, is not unfamiliar with
their charms. The opposition between war and the arts is powerfully portrayed by
Homer when he shows us the great warrior Akhilleus, who in anger has withdrawn
from the fighting at Troy, in his tent, singing the deeds of the great men of the past
(Iliad 9.185–194). In the Greek text, this word significantly is the last one before the
composer asks Ares to leave off from his war-like nature in the following line.
7 Kypris: Another name for Aphrodite (see OH 22.7+n). Ares is often portrayed as a
lover of Aphrodite, as in the somewhat risqué story of how Hephaistos captures the
adulterous  pair  in  flagrante,  sung  by  the  bard  Demodokos  as  part  of  the
entertainment for Odysseus at Scheria; see OH 66i. There seems to have been an
Orphic version of their relationship in which Ares rapes Aphrodite (Orphic fragment
275). In one fragment from the Shorter Krater, a work attributed to Orpheus, the
gods are interpreted allegorically, and Ares, who is equivalent to war, is explicitly
contrasted  with  Aphrodite,  who  is  made  equivalent  to  peace  (Orphic  fragment
413.4).
7 Lyaios: Another name for Dionysos; it means the “one who loosens/sets free” (see OH
50i). For the connection of music and peace, see note to line 5. The ecstatic worship
of Dionysos represents a kind of madness that is kindred to the battle rage of Ares;
compare the martial prowess of the possessed Bacchantes in Euripides Bacchae
714–768. It should be noted that, like Ares, Dionysos and Orpheus are said to have
come from Thrace. Athene and Pan also are associated with madness and battle (see
OH 32.6n).

8–9: Agricultural works often suffer in times of war, both due to the fact that the farmer
leaves his homestead to fight and that marauding armies might ravage the land as
they  pass  through.  As  with  music  and  celebration,  agriculture  is  a  mark  of
civilization and thus incompatible with the savagery of war. Peace nurtures the
young for obvious reasons. It is illustrative to compare Tyrtaios' admonition to the
young that it is noble to die on the front lines (fragment 10) with the words of the
defeated Kroisos to Kyros, the king of Persia: “No one is so foolish as to choose war
over peace; for in peace sons bury their fathers, but in war fathers bury their sons”
(Herodotos 1.87.4). See also OH 40.2n.
66. To Hephaistos
Hephaistos, the famed blacksmith of the gods, is the son of Zeus and Hera or in some
accounts just Hera, who bore him apart from Zeus in retaliation for the latter's fathering
of Athene without (direct) feminine aid (Hesiod Theogony 927–929). According to
Homer, Hephaistos was cast down out of Olympos on two occasions. Once Zeus threw
him out when he tried to take up the cause of his mother. All day he hurtled through the
sky until he landed at the island Lemnos near sundown, where the Sinties succored the
god (Iliad 1.590–594). Another time was at his very birth by Hera because she despised
the fact that her son was born lame; Thetis and Eurynome kept him safe and cared for
him in secret (Iliad 18.394–405 and Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.311–325). Hephaistos
eventually  joins  the  Olympians.  He  takes  vengeance  on  his  mother  by  artfully
constructing a chair that binds her fast when she sits on it. Hephaistos then conveniently
skips town and thereafter refuses to return when entreated by the gods. In one version,
Ares tries to free his mother but is frightened off by fires. Dionysos is dispatched. He
gets the dour Hephaistos drunk, brings the wayward son home, and a reconciliation is
finally reached (cf. Alkaios fragment 349, Pausanias 1.20.3, and Hyginus 166). Thus
two outsiders are integrated into the society of the gods. The story was very popular in
Archaic  times  as  evidenced  by  the  numerous  vase  paintings  depicting  the  return.
Perhaps the most famous one, found on the François vase, comically shows Hephaistos
riding a mule amid reveling satyrs and nymphs as Dionysos leads the party to the seated
Olympian gods (Boardman 1991, pl. 46.7). A tale with a somewhat similar pattern
appears in Homer. In the Odyssey, the bard Demodokos sings of the adulterous affair
between Ares and Aphrodite, Hephaistos' wife. Sun acts as informant, and Hephaistos
forges a net with strands so fine, that they are practically invisible. The net entraps Ares
and Aphrodite the next time they make love. Hephaistos bursts on the scene and calls
the gods to witness; the goddesses, we are told, stay home out of modesty. Here it is
Poseidon, not Dionysos, who barely mollifies the enraged god (Odyssey 8.266–366; see

also OH 65.7n). Although Aphrodite is Hephaistos' wife in the Odyssey, it is Kharis, one
of the Graces, in the Iliad and Aglaia, another one of the Graces, in Hesiod (Theogony
945–946) and an Orphic account (Orphic fragment 272). In all of these cases, there is
an intended contrast, perhaps humorous, between beauty and ugliness. Even in antiquity,
sometimes the geek gets the girl.
A characteristic emphasized in the literature is the cleverness and inventiveness of
Hephaistos. As a divine artisan, he creates wondrous things, e.g., exquisite jewelry, self-
moving tripods, self-blowing bellows, android women of gold, watchdogs made of gold
and silver (Iliad 18.372–377, 417–421, 470–473; Odyssey 7.91–94). He forges weapons
and armor for Herakles (Hesiod Shield 122–140) and Akhilleus (Iliad 18.478–614); in
both cases, the poet focuses on the elaborate imagery Hephaistos puts on the shield.
Along with Athene, Aphrodite, and others, he fashions Pandora (Hesiod Works and
Days 59–82). The mirror that the Titans use to lure Dionysos is also a product of
Hephaistos (Orphic fragment 309). In the Homeric Hymn to Hephaistos he is praised as
a teacher of fine crafts and skills to man, whom he thereby elevated from savagery to
civilization. In this, he is similar to other trickster gods associated with fire, such as
Prometheus (cf. Aeschylus Prometheus Bound 436–506) and Loki in Norse mythology;
see further OH 40.8–9n. Indeed, Hephaistos was so closely associated with fire, his very
name could be used as a metonymy for the element, as already in Homer (Iliad 2.426);
note, too, that he is addressed as “unwearying fire” in our hymn (line ). He is invoked
by Hera to fight off the river Skamandros from Akhilleus, a battle of the elements fire
and water (Iliad 21.328–382). Hephaistos also has similarities with the clever, inventive,
and magical blacksmith figures in myth: the Telkhines, Idaian Dactyls, and Kabeiroi
(see OH O.20–22). These last are sometimes considered to be the sons or grandsons of
Hephaistos at Lemnos (cf. Herodotos 3.37).
It is on this island that Hephaistos had significant cultic importance. Lemnos had an
ancient non-Greek population. The name Hephaistos is not of Greek origin, and it is a
non-Greek people, the Sinties, who Homer claimed were hospitable to the god when he
fell from Olympos. We do not know much about his worship there. Philostratus, who
was from Lemnos, gives a description of one ritual (Heroicus 53.5–7). It seems that
every year, the hearths—and especially the smiths' forges—were rekindled with fire
brought from Delos. For nine days all fires were extinguished on the island and offerings
to the dead were made, during which the ship from Delos could not land. The new fires
are expressly said to start the new life of the community. The only other place in
antiquity where Hephaistos had significant worship was at Athens, where the god was
closely connected with that other divinity of skills and crafts—Athene; for details, see
Plato Critias 109c–d and 112b, Burkert 1985, pp. 167–168, 220, and Larson 2007, pp.
159–160. These two divinities are joined outside Athenian cult as well, e.g., in Odyssey
6.233, Plato Protagoras 321d–322a, and Laws 920d. In one of the poems ascribed to

Orpheus, it is said that the (cosmic) Kyklopes were the first artisans and they were the
ones who taught Hephaistos and Athene the arts (Orphic fragment 269).
4–5: The element fire is one of the four basic elements postulated by Empedokles, a
thesis accepted by many later philosophers (see OH 5.4n and OH 15i). Fire appears
to have had a central role in Herakleitos' philosophy (cf. Kirk, Raven, and Schofield
1983, nos. 217–220). The Stoics, influenced by Herakleitos, held that fire was the
basic substance in the world and thought that the universe periodically returned to its
original state in a great conflagration (see Long and Sedley 1987, pp. 274–279; see
also the “ever-living fire” of Zeus' thunderbolt in Kleanthes' Hymn To Zeus 9–13).
Ovid hints at this in passing only to playfully give an idea of what such conflagration
might be like in his description of Phaethon's failure to control the chariot of Sun
(Metamorphoses 1.253–261, 2.161–313; cf. Hesiod Theogony 687–710 and 853–
868). The belief that the world would end in fire is of course not limited to the
Greeks; compare Ragnarök in Norse mythology and, to a more limited extent, the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah in Genesis 18:20ff. The author of the Derveni
papyrus also seems to consider fire to be a constitutive element of the original state
of the cosmos, and, according to him, the initial separation of fire into the sun is
what precipitates the creation of the universe. Elsewhere in the collection, Ether,
conceived as fire, is called the “best cosmic element” (OH 5.4).
6–7: In describing the shield of Akhilleus, Homer mentions first and foremost that it is
bounded by the ocean and that in its center are the sun, moon, and stars. Hephaistos
forged the heaven in some Orphic accounts (Orphic fragment 274), and there might
be some connection between this and the Homeric shield. The Demiurge who creates
the world in Plato's Timaeus is also an artisan and perhaps ultimately lurks behind
this characterization of Hephaistos. The Greek word “dēmiourgos” literally means
“worker for the people” (formed from “dēmos,” “people,” and “ergon,” “work”). It
does not appear in this poem, but it could not, since the word cannot be fitted into
the hexameter rhythm; the closely related word “ergastēr,” “worker,” does appear in
line 4, however. There may be Stoic influence in these lines as well. The fire that
was the base substance of the world was referred to them as a “designing fire”
(“tekhnikon pur”), which is what initiated and sustained creation as a rational whole,
as opposed to “undesigning fire” (“atekhnon pur”), which had no such generative
potential (see Long and Sedley 1987, fragments 46A–D, G, and 47A, C, F, and pp.
277–278). Naturally, the ether, stars, sun, and moon, believed to be composed of the
fiery element, have such associations in their respective hymns (OH 5, 7, 8, 9; and
note the different order in this hymn, probably again due to metrical considerations).
8: This line probably is referring to the central role of fire in civilization; see the

introduction to this hymn. Fire was exceedingly important for everyday life; e.g., it
provided light and was used in cooking and sacrifices. Compare also the hymn to
Hestia, where the goddess is addressed as “mistress of ever-burning fire” (OH 84.2).
9 you dwell in human bodies
: The hymn moves in a top-down fashion: cosmic fire,
cultural fire, and now individual fire. There was a belief in antiquity that the soul was
composed of fire, or at least a hot element. The Stoics, for example, equated the soul
with fire, and thus composed out of the same element as the cosmos. In light of lines
12–13, however, a more biological fire might be meant. Fire, heat, and warmth play
a role in ancient theories of life. Among the Stoics, Kleanthes argued by analogy
from the fire that constituted the life of a living being to the fire that sustained the
entire cosmos, which was conceived as a living being; Khrysippos opted for the term
“pneuma,”  here  meaning  something  like  “hot  air”  (see  Long  and  Sedley  1fragments 46B, G, J, 47C, O, 53X, Y, and pp. 286–287, 319). In both cases, that
which constitutes celestial phenomena and the individual life is the same element,
merely differing in scope. It is perhaps worth remembering in this context that
human beings in the Orphic cosmogony are created from the Titans who were
incinerated by Zeus' lightning bolt (see OH 37i), and Dionysos, too, can be said to
have been “conceived in fire” (OH 45.1, OH 52.2). Fire and heat also are used by
poets to describe emotional effects: love can burn or melt, and Sappho's famous
catalogue of the physical effects of jealousy include a “subtle fire [coursing] under
the skin” (fragment 31). See also OH 5.3, OH 10.27+n, and OH 18.9n.
12: Fire brings many benefits to man, yet it is also destructive (cf. “all-eating” in line 5),
as in the case of the thunderbolt that kills Semele but leads to Dionysos' birth.
Hephaistos, too, has two sides to his personality. He can play the role of jester, as
when he hobbles around to excite laughter from the gods and defuse a tense situation
between Zeus and Hera (Iliad 1.595–600); on the other hand, as mentioned in the
introduction to this hymn, he is also susceptible to anger. As often in the collection,
an ambiguous deity is asked to come in his beneficial guise while putting aside his
deleterious nature.
67. To Asklepios
Asklepios seems to have originally been a hero-physician from Thessaly. He is first
mentioned in Homer as the father of the “good doctors” Makhaon and Podaleirios (Iliad
2.731–732). In myth, he is usually the son of Koronis and Apollon (see Homeric Hymn
to Asklepios 16.2–3). Before he was born, though, Koronis marries or has an affair with
a mortal. Apollon learns about this and sends his sister Artemis to kill the pregnant

Koronis. However, when the corpse of Koronis is on the pyre, Apollon takes pity on his
unborn son and rescues him. The boy is entrusted to the wise centaur Kheiron, who
instructs him in the arts of medicine. Asklepios becomes the world's greatest physician,
but he runs afoul of Zeus by bringing a dead man back to life. Zeus punishes this
transgression by kerblasting Asklepios with a lightning bolt. For the story, see Pindar
Pythian Odes 3, Ovid Metamorphoses 2.600–634, and Apollodoros 3.10.3. Apollodoros
lists a number of individuals claimed by various sources to be the person Asklepios
resurrects, including Hymenaios by the “Orphics” (see further Orphic fragment 365).
Asklepios later came to be regarded as divine, and he might originally have been a
god who was “demoted” to a hero by the time of Homer. He had important cults at
Epidauros and Kos, and people would come to his temples for healing. One notable
(though not exclusive) feature of Asklepian cult is incubation. Here the worshippers
would spend the night in the god's temple in the hopes of receiving a dream vision that
would be accompanied by healing (see also OH 86i). Examples in literature include
Aristophanes' comedy Wealth, where the eponymous figure is cured of his proverbial
blindness by undergoing such a ritual, and the fourth mimiambus of Herodas. The last
words of Sokrates are to Krito, asking him to offer a rooster to Asklepios, a fitting
gesture for one who cheerfully looked on death as a release of the soul from the prison
of the body (Plato Phaedo 118a). The tragic poet Sophokles is said to have played a role
in bringing Asklepios' cult from Epidauros to Athens (ca. 420 BC). For more on the cult
of Asklepios, see Burkert 1985, pp. 267–268, and Larson 2007, pp. 192–195. See also
OH 9i.
Our hymn has very little connection with the mythological account or traditional
cultic worship. Instead, it focuses on the soteriological aspect of the one who brings
healing in a world filled with pain and suffering. Health is one of the material benefits
that are a recurring concern in the collection (see OH 68i). For the placement of this
hymn in the collection, see OH 69i.
1 Paian
: For this name/title of Apollon, see OH 34.1n. The alternate form Paion is used
of Herakles, who is also portrayed as a healer in his hymn (see OH 12.10+n). It is
possible that just as Herakles' divine portion in myth is transferred to Olympos upon
the immolation of his physical body and then deified (see OH 12i), so, too, perhaps
there was an account now lost to us where Asklepios, immolated by Zeus' lightning,
undergoes a similar process. Semele, the mother of Dionysos, was also deified after
being struck by Zeus' lightning (see OH 44i). See also note to line 5.
2 charm away the pains: Asklepios is similarly described in his Homeric hymn (16.4)
and in Pindar Pythian Odes 3.51–52. Musical incantations were used in healing (see
West 1992, pp. 32–33), and it is a commonplace in Greek literature that music

brings temporary relief to cares and worries (e.g., Hesiod Theogony 55). It might be
that Apollon's role as musician led to his being associated with the healing arts; see
OH 34i.
4: For the collocation of sickness and the inevitability of death, see Sophokles Antigone
361–364 (“for death alone/he [man] will not find an escape,/but escapes from
invincible diseases/he has contrived”); also see Euripides Alkestis 963–972, which
mentions the inability of Orpheus (or his poetry) and the “sons of Asklepios” (i.e.,
the Hippocratics) to ward off Necessity (i.e., death). One could interpret this line in
a provisionary sense; insofar as Asklepios can heal fatal diseases, he consequently
“puts an end to death,” albeit temporarily. Another possibility is to understand
“harsh” as being emphasized. The end of this hymn asks the divinity to “bring life to
a good end,” which might be construed as requesting a painless one at a ripe old age
(cf. OH 87.12+n); a similar idea is to be found in the following hymn (OH 68.9+n).
Thus, the “harsh fate of death” would refer to death by disease. Given the last line of
the hymn, it probably does not allude to the rewards in the afterlife the initiates
might have expected to receive.
5 spirit of ... growth: The Greek word translated here is used elsewhere of Earth (OH
26.3), Eleusinian Demeter (OH 40.10), and, most notably, Adonis (OH 56.6), who
also is killed and reborn (albeit as a flower). Dionysos, too, is closely tied to
vegetation; see OH 30i and OH 50.5n. Indeed, there is some overlap in the stories of
his and Asklepios' birth. Both have a mother killed by a jealous divinity, both are
pulled out of fire by their father before being born, and both are given to wise hybrid
creatures to be raised (Kheiron the centaur in the case of Asklepios, Silenos in the
case  of  Dionysos;  see OH  54.1+n).  This  affinity  further  enhances  Asklepios'
soteriological appeal. See also note to line 1 and OH 68.1n.
6 son of Phoibos Apollon: This accords with the accounts of Asklepios, and it is the
only explicit mythical detail in this brief hymn. On the other hand, there are a
number of instances in this hymn where a word is reminiscent of a cult epithet of
Apollon in his capacity as healer. First, Asklepios is called Paian (line 1) and
“savior” (line 8), as is the Apollon of cult. The phrase “you ward off evil” (line 5) is
a translation of a single word, “apalexikakos,” which is a compound form of the
word “alexikakos,” another cult epithet of Apollon. Similarly, “helper” (“epikouros”)
at line 5 is closely related to the cult title “epikourios.” Both of these words appear
only here in the collection.
68. To Hygeia

Hygeia, also spelled Hygieia (e.g., OH 67.7), is the Greek word for “health,” and, as
with many other abstractions, has been vaguely personified as a goddess. She is usually
conceived as the daughter of Asklepios, but she exceptionally is said to be his wife in
the previous hymn. In Orphic  fragment  262,  she  is  the  child  of  Eros  (Love)  and
Persuasion; both of these deities are usually connected with Aphrodite (see OH 55.9n),
and it is possible that the placement of the Asklepios/Hygeia pair of hymns was due to
this association (see OH 69i; note, too, the overlap between Asklepios and Adonis, for
which see OH 67.5n). We have the opening of a poem by Likymnios, a late fifth-
century poet, addressing her as “glistening-eyed mother most high, / desired queen of
the august seats of Apollon, / soft-smiling Hygieia” (PMG 769). Her worship was closely
tied  to  that  of  Asklepios,  but  she  was  not  always  subordinate  to  him;  at  Sikyon
(Pausanias 2.11.6), for example, women dedicated their hair and scraps of clothing to
her cult statue. It is notable that a native of Sikyon, the poet Ariphron (late fifth or early
fourth century BC), wrote a paian to Hygieia (PMG 813); he calls her the “most revered
of the blessed ones” and avers that all human happiness requires her. Asklepios does not
appear in it, although it is possible that the poem as we have it is only a fragment. In
Athens,  Hygieia  could  be  invoked  along  with  Zeus  and  Agathos  Daimon  (Good
Divinity; see OH 73i) in libations poured after the washing of the hands and before the
drinking in the symposium. Athene was also worshipped as Health at Athens (see OH
32.16n). In the Hippocratic oath, her name follows that of Asklepios. It is also possible
that the placement of this hymn intentionally echoes the Hippocratic order, but more
likely it just follows the usual practice of our composer to place hymns to subordinate
divinities (here a male/female pair) after the more important member (see further OH
14.8–9n).
1 blooming: Health is naturally described as blooming, and her gift is described in
similar  terms  (cf.  “every  house  blossoms”  in  line  4).  The  bulk  of  Ariphron's
fragment cited in the introduction is a conditional sentence that runs as follows: if
there is any pleasure for men, “then with you, blessed Hygieia, it is in full bloom and
shines with the gentle talk of the Graces.” The theme of vegetation is found in the
previous hymn, where Asklepios is called a “blessed spirit of joyful growth” (OH
67.5+n). It appears in Persephone's hymn (OH 29.18–19), and it is a prominent
motif in the hymns to Dionysos (see OH 50i+5n).
2 mother of all: Compare the Likymnios fragment, cited in the introduction to this
hymn, and see also OH 10.1n.
6 loathed by Hades: Hygieia, in her capacity as a healer of disease and consequently a
goddess who keeps living things alive, perforce delays Hades from increasing his
kingdom.

7 apart from you: The same sentiment is found in Ariphon's poem; see note to line 1.
8 wealth: Some combination of wealth, riches, and prosperity are desired along with
health throughout the collection; see OH 15.10–11n.
9 the many pains of old age: The idea here is not that Hygieia keeps young men
healthy so that they survive to experience the suffering connected with old age.
Rather, the wish is to reach old age without pains, i.e., in good health; cf. OH 29.19,
OH 67.4n and OH 87.12+n.
69. To the Erinyes
The Erinyes (often translated as “Furies,” after the Latin Furiae, but the etymology is
uncertain) are a group of female divinities who take vengeance for criminal acts; they
are particularly concerned with the slaughtering of kin and the breaking of one's oath.
We find different origins in the mythological record. Hesiod tells us that they were born
from the blood that fecundated Earth after Kronos castrated his father Sky (Theogony
183–187). Although the violent Giants were also born from this act, it is especially
appropriate for the Erinyes in light of their role as instruments of vengeance. Later in
the poem (469–473), Rhea asks her parents Earth and Sky “to contrive such a plan that
the birth of her dear child [Zeus]/would go unnoticed and her father's Erinys would take
revenge.” Sometimes, though, the Erinyes are said to be daughters of Night (e.g.,
Aeschylus Eumenides 321–323). In either case, their origin is from a primeval, chthonic
entity. Sophokles ingeniously combines both traditions by describing the Eumenides
(who  here  are  equivalent  to  the  Erinyes;  see  below)  as  “daughters  of  Earth  and
Darkness” (Oedipus at Kolonos 40). Darkness is a male figure (Greek Skotos) and thus
an appropriate masculine analogue to the feminine Night.
The Erinyes also have fertility associations, and this might have been their original
domain. This connection with fertility is suggested by the fact that Earth is sometimes
their mother. It is also evidenced by their close relation with the Eumenides. The two
groups were originally distinct but later were usually identified with one another—the
Erinyes representing the negative, punitive aspect of transgressing boundaries and the
Eumenides  the  positive,  beneficial  result  of  maintaining  such.  A  process  of
transformation is described in Aeschylus' Eumenides, where he connects the mythical
Erinyes, who form the chorus to this play, with the cult of the Eumenides (called
Semnai Theai, the August Goddesses, at Athens). At the end of the play, the Erinyes,
having  been  denied  their  prerogative  to  mete  out  punishment  to  Orestes  for  his
matricide, threaten to afflict Athens with disease that would make the land “leafless”
and “childless”; after Athene assuages their anger by offering them honors in Athens, the

Erinyes in turn promise benedictions for a prosperous land. This ability to destroy or
nurture life hints at their powers of fertility. Furthermore, we find Demeter worshipped
as Demeter Erinys (sometimes called just Erinys). According to Pausanias (8.25.4–10),
Demeter, while searching for Persephone, turns herself into a horse in order to escape
the unwanted attentions of Poseidon. Upon recognizing the ruse, he transforms himself
into a horse as well. The result of their union is a mysterious daughter (whose name is
not given) and the wonder horse Areion, who is sometimes said to have Earth as his
mother. Demeter was given the name Erinys due to her initial anger over the encounter;
compare the anger of Nemesis (OH 61i) and Melinoe (OH 71.4–5+n). The name Erinys
is also found among other divinities in a Linear B tablet from Knossos, but nothing
about this goddess is known. It may be that she was a completely independent fertility
goddess  who  eventually  became  identified  with  Demeter,  and,  in  a  separate
development, was expanded into a plurality representing different aspects of the original
goddess, whatever they were (cf. note to line ).
In cult, the Erinyes do not appear to have been directly worshipped. Aside from the
cult of Demeter Erinys, who might not be connected with the group, there was a temple
to the Erinyes of Laios and Oedipus in Sparta and its colony Thera (Herodotos 4.149.2);
it is interesting to note that we have evidence for the close proximity between a tomb of
Oedipus and the Eumenides' cult both in Athens and the Attic deme Kolonos. The
Spartan cult, though, was founded by a particular clan in an effort to ward off continued
infanticide (compare the threats made by the Erinyes in the Eumenides, which are
another sign of their connection with fertility), but the nature of worship is unclear. In
general, however, it is likely that in many cases the cults to the Eumenides are, in fact, to
the Erinyes, albeit in their capacity to bring blessings. One approaches divinities for
favors, and the invocation of the deity by means of a euphemistic name was felt to
increase the chance that the divinity would appear in its friendlier guise. To call on the
Erinyes by this name would increase the risk that the goddesses would appear in their
unpleasant aspect (cf. OH O.12+n and OH 71.11n). By the same token, it is the Erinyes
(alongside other chthonic powers)—and not the Eumenides—who are invoked in curse
tablets, where their violent and deadly powers are deliberately sought for deleterious
effect. For a similar reason, they also at times appear in magical spells, e.g., to help
bring back a lover or catch a thief. The Erinyes are sometimes portrayed in the literature
as physical manifestations of curses, and in fact are called Curses (Greek Arai) from
time to time. They can also be found rationalized as a perpetrator's guilty conscience.
Both the Erinyes and Eumenides are mentioned in the first few columns of the Derveni
papyrus; see further OH 70i. Very little of the text can be read, let alone understood,
and  addressing  the  various  possible  interpretations  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this
commentary; see Betegh 2004, pp. 74–91, 218–219.
The close connection between the Erinyes and Eumenides is maintained in our

collection. The hymns to these goddesses form a contiguous pair (cf. OH 14.8–9n), and
there are many correspondences in language and imagery. Some of these are pointed
out in the notes below, as well as in the following hymn. Yet, despite these similarities,
the two groups are not identified with one another but rather are kept distinct. The
Eumenides are given a genealogy, for example. Even more surprising, in view of the
tradition, is that they are described in demonic terms—more so than the Erinyes.
Further differences are that each group is summoned for somewhat different reasons
and given different offerings. Since the Hymns were composed for a specific, pragmatic
purpose, such a material distinction implies a conceptual one. The negative/positive
polarity of the Erinyes/Eumenides found in earlier times has been effaced; instead we
have two very similar sets of divinities, invoked in a slightly different, but related,
manner. This allows for a certain consistency with the often conflicting literary and
religious traditions. A similar explanation applies to the close relationship of the Erinyes
with the Fates (see OH 59i) and Nemesis (see OH 61i).
This hymn begins a series (OH 69–77) whose placement within the collection is
curious. The other hymns show evidence of having been deliberately positioned (see in
particular OH 15i, OH 30i, OH 55i, OH 61i, OH 79i, and OH 87i), but these hymns
seem out of place, a mere listing of pairs (except for the hymn to Melinoe, which is
nevertheless closely related to the Eryines/Eumenides pair and clearly belongs with
them; see OH 71i). Now, it may very well be that our composer did not know how to
integrate these entities and so just tossed them together in a sort of random miscellany
near the end of the collection. On the other hand, one thread that ties them together is
that all of the addressees are much more bound up with cult worship than with literary
mythology. The exception to this proves the rule: both the Muses and Mnemosyne are
explicitly connected with cult practice in their hymns (OH 76.7 and OH 77.9–10), and
note that memory plays an important role in the eschatology of some of the Bacchic
gold  tablets.  Here,  though,  Mnemosyne  is  invoked  right  before  Dawn  to  help  the
initiates, who have probably been worshipping the entire night, to remember the rest of
the hymns and the ritual (see OH 77i). The block of OH 69–77 may further be
connected with the Dionysian hymns (OH 45–54) through their cultic, mythological, and
linguistic associations (e.g., the maenadic imagery in OH 69, Leukothea the addressee
of OH 72, the Muses and Mnemosyne as founders of mystic rites). There might also be
ring composition with the final group of hymns, as they end with death (literally) and
the OH 69–77 group begins with death figures (Erinyes, Eumenides, and Melinoe).
1 Tisiphone, Allekto, noble Megaira: We have only sparse attestations for the names,
one of which is Apollodoros (1.1.4), whose source seems ultimately to have been
derived  from  an  Orphic  theogony  (West  1983,  pp.  121–126).  Therefore,  it  is
possible that they are Orphic in origin. The names are significant. “Tisiphone” means

“vengeance  for  murder,”  Allekto  (sometimes  Alekto)  “unceasing,”  and  Megaira
“grudge.” Taken together, they represent in particular the Erinyes' role as punishers
of murderers. The dead victim bears a “grudge” that requires “vengeance for the
murder,” and this grudge is “unceasing” until the murderer is punished. The same
exact line appears in the Orphic Argonautika (968), and these are the only places
where all three Erinyes are named together in extant poetry. Persephone appears in
place of Tisiphone in a prayer to Moon found in a magical handbook, but it is
possible that this was a lapse by the writer; Persephone's name appears again a few
lines later in the text; see note to line 16.
2 Bacchic cries: Throughout this hymn, the Erinyes are described through Dionysian
and particularly maenadic imagery (see OH 1.3n and OH 52i). Like the maenads,
they raise Bacchic cries, they are active at night (line 3), they are rabid (line 6), they
howl (line 6), they wear animal skins (line 7), and snakes adorn their hair (line 16;
see note below). This association already appears in Greek tragedy; for references
and an interpretation, see Johnston 1999, pp. 253–256. For loud noise in Dionysian
worship, see OH 30.1n.
4 Styx: A river in the underworld. Its name means “hate.” The Olympian gods, when
making an oath, swear by its waters (Hesiod Theogony 775–806). Hesiod tells us that
the Erinyes assisted in the birth of Oath, whose mother was Strife (Works and Days
803–804). The water of the Styx is described as splendid in Orpheus' address to
Mousaios (OH O.29), and this is the only other mention of the river in our collection.
Styx is a daughter of Okeanos; see OH 83.3n.
9 phantoms airy, invisible: Two closely related passages in Hesiod seem relevant to
this description. First, Dike, whenever wronged in a court of law, visits ruin on the
city clothed in airy mist (Works and Days 222–224). A little later in the same poem,
Hesiod addresses the kings and reminds them that “upon this earth that nurtures
many Zeus can levy/thirty thousand deathless guardians of mortal men, / who keep a
watchful eye over verdicts and cruel acts/as they rove the whole earth, clothed in
mist” (252–255). Thereupon Dike is represented as a girl who runs to daddy Zeus
whenever men make false charges in order that vengeance be taken on them (the
verb used, “apoteisei” (260), is cognate with the “tisi” in Tisiphone; see note to line
1). See also OH 61i and OH 62i. The Erinyes as described in our hymn have a
similar function, and it is very suggestive that a fragment attributed to Orpheus
(Orphic fragment 851) implies that the Erinyes are the agents of Zeus' indignation at
those  who  do  not  respect  the  ordinances  of  their  “ancestors.”  A  forged  letter
attributed to Herakleitos explicitly connects the Erinyes with the Hesiodic guardians:
“Many are the Erinyes of justice [dikē], the watchers of moral failings. Hesiod lied

when he said there were thirty thousand. They are few and not sufficient for the evil
in the world. There is much wickedness” (9.3.1). For the Erinyes' connection with
Dike, see note to line  below. Homer twice uses the epithet “mist-roving” (Iliad
9.571, 19.87) to describe an Erinys; the same word is used to describe Moon (OH
9.2), but there the word does not have the connotation of invisibility. Words denoting
“air(y)” or “mist(y)” appear with some frequency in the Hymns. Usually they merely
refer to the element “air” and are not used descriptively of a phantasmal appearance.
Both ideas, however, are combined, when Zephyros is called “airy, ... invisible” (OH
81.6), just as the Erinyes are here. For more information on airy phantoms, see OH
71i.
15 you gaze as the eye of Dike: For the eye of Dike, see OH 62.1+n. The Erinyes are
often  connected  with  Dike  in  literature.  The  chorus  of  Erinyes  in  Aeschylus'
Eumenides declare that fear of their punishment makes a man obey Dike (490–565);
compare the Sisyphos fragment mentioned in OH 61.5n. Their role in the social order
of man also finds curious reflection in a fragment of the Pre-Socratic philosopher
Herakleitos (Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983, no. 226), which happens also to be
cited in the Derveni papyrus. Herakleitos says that the sun will not overstep its
proper measure; otherwise the Erinyes, “assistants of Dike,” will find him out (see
also note to line 9). A similar portrayal of the Erinyes is found in an enigmatic saying
attributed to Pythagoras by Hippolytos: “If you travel abroad from your own [land?],
do not turn back; otherwise the Erinyes, helpers of Dike, will come after you”
(Refutation of All Heresies 6.26.1). Perhaps the mention of the “speedy flames of the
sun and the moon's glow” (line 10) is a remnant of such philosophical speculation.
Our hymn certainly portrays the Erinyes as part of divine order: they “howl over
Necessity's dictates” (line 6) and are called “goddesses of fate” (line 16; see note
below). Their connection with Dike reinforces the idea that not only is there order in
the world but that it also possesses an ethical dimension; see further OH 64i.
16 snake-haired: A traditional characteristic in literature and art. Aeschylus is the first
extant writer to describe the Erinyes thus (Libation Bearers 1048–1050), and, if
Pausanias (1.28.6) is to be believed, he was the first one to do so. The same word
appears in line 10 of the next hymn in the same metrical position (and see OH 70.9–
10+n).
16 many-shaped goddesses of fate: Compare “of the thousand faces” (line 8; the two
words both end in “-morph,” “shape”). Their connection with “Necessity's dictates”
(line 6) is consistent with their equivalence to the Fates. In Vergil's Aeneid, the
Erinys Allekto is described as having “a thousand [= many, countless] names”
(7.337), and Servius in his comment on this line reports that Euripides in one of his

tragedies (now lost) has Allekto claim that she was not born to fulfill a single
function (implied are her traditional roles, as described above) but that she is Fortune
(probably Tyche in the original), Nemesis, Fate, and Necessity (fragment 1022). This
probably is what Herakleitos and Pythagoras had in mind (see note to line ), and,
indeed, Euripides might have been directly influenced by one or both of them. A
prayer to Moon in a magical handbook also calls the Erinyes “many-shaped.” Even
more pertinent, at the beginning of this prayer Moon is equated with them (they are
named here, with Persephone in place of Tisiphone; see note to line 1), Dike, and
the Fates, while at the end she is equated with Necessity, Fate, Erinys, and Dike
(PGM 4.2795–2799; 2858–2860; see also note to line 9). This shows how easily the
Erinyes could be seen as a different manifestation of similar divinities, not just of the
Eumenides. Usually, though, the Fates and Erinyes are kept separate. Both are, in
some accounts, daughters of Night, and so could be considered sisters (see the
introduction to this hymn). Agamemnon blames Zeus, Fate, and the Erinys for his
ruinous dispute with Akhilleus (Iliad 19.86–90). In the Eumenides, Fate is said to
have conferred on the Erinyes their prerogatives (334–339). In our collection the two
groups  are  kept  distinct,  despite  the  number  of  verbal  and  conceptual
correspondences between their hymns (as with the Eumenides; see OH 70i). They
are both concerned with the moral order of the cosmos (see OH 59i), albeit from
different perspectives. The Fates work from above—while still maintaining chthonic
associations (see OH 59.3–4n)—and the Erinyes from below, with us hapless mortals
caught in between.
70. To the Eumenides
The Eumenides, the “kindly-disposed ones,” are a group of female divinities similar to,
and  usually  identified  with,  the  Erinyes.  In  Athens,  they  were  called  the  August
Goddesses (Semnai Theai). In Oedipus at Kolonos 461–492, Sophokles gives a literary
description of a rite of atonement to the Eumenides, and their worship has a significant
role in this play. For more information about the Eumenides, and their relation to the
Erinyes,  see  the  introduction  and  notes  to  the  previous  hymn.  They  are  usually
considered beneficial goddesses, as their name would suggest. Unlike the Erinyes, they
are not invoked in spells or curses. In our hymn, however, they are given a more Stygian
and infernal character that is usually reserved for the Erinyes. The Eumenides were in
fact originally fertility goddesses with definite chthonic associations. This can be seen in
Aeschylus Eumenides  903–967,  where  the  transformed  Erinyes  promise  first  and
foremost bountiful production. The Orphic tradition seems to have recognized their
primeval  function  as  well,  for  in Orphic  fragment  293,  they  are  called  “flower-

producers.” See also the note to lines 2–3. The Derveni papyrus enigmatically equates
the Eumenides with souls.
–3: Chthonic Zeus is another name for Hades; see OH 18.3+n. Persephone is also
called the mother of the Erinyes at OH 29.6. The parentage given in the Hymns
differs from the one found in the mainstream tradition (see OH 69i). However, two
fragments ascribed to Orpheus (Orphic fragment 292–293) also present Hades and
Persephone  as  the  parents  of  “the  Eumenides  under  the  earth.”  This  chthonic
connection is not exclusively Orphic; for example, the Athenian Semnai Theai dwelt
in a cave beneath the earth (cf. Aeschylus Eumenides 1004ff.; also OH 69.3–4 and
8).  Orpheus  is  also  supposed  to  have  written  that  Demeter  prophesied  to  her
daughter that she would “mount the blooming bed of Apollon/and give birth to
splendid  children,  their  faces  burning  with  fire”  (Orphic  fragment  284).  These
children are the Eumenides, who are also described as “bright-faced” in Orphic
fragment 293. It would seem, then, that the Orphic tradition had two different
fathers for the Eumenides. However, the name Apollon was often connected with the
verb “apollumi,” “I destroy,” and it is possible that Apollon here is used as an
oracular periphrasis for Hades, “the destroyer” (just as he is called “Chthonic Zeus”
in our hymn); another possibility is that the different fathers represent two alternate
versions that were considered Orphic in antiquity. These two interpretations are
discussed by West 1983, pp. 95–98, 243–244.
4–5: The Erinyes also watch over human beings “as the eye of Dike, ever in charge of
justice” (OH 69.15), and they “howl over Necessity's dictates” (OH 69.6). Both
groups are described by the adjective “timōroi” (translated “retribution” at OH 69.and “punish” here), which is used in the same metrical position. These goddesses,
then,  are  described  as  having  more  or  less  the  same  function.  One  interesting
difference, though, is that the Eumenides are said to be concerned with “impious
mortals,” whereas the Erinyes, like the Fates, watch over all mortals, just and unjust
alike.
6 black-skinned queens: The color black is often associated with the underworld and
its denizens. The Eumenides are also “nocturnal” (line 9) and “of the night” (line 10,
and see note to line 10). The word translated as “black-skinned” is also used of Sky
(OH 4.7, there translated “dark blue”), and Aphrodite is called on to join the
company of the “dark-faced nymphs” (OH 55.22). The Eumenides are similarly
called “sable-skinned” at Euripides Orestes 321.
6–7  your  awesome  eyes  ...  /  ...  darts  of  light: Compare the description of the
Eumenides mentioned in Orphic fragment 284 and 293, cited in the note to lines
2–3. In a hymn to Moon found in the magical papyri, she is called “flesh devourer”

(PGM 4.2866) in a context where she is equated with the Erinyes and others (see OH
69.16n “many-shaped”), and there are a number of close verbal correspondences
between this passage and our hymn (see further note to line 10). Moon is also said to
be seen eating human flesh in other parts of the same spell book. A curse spell calls
on “the flesh-devouring gods,” among others, for its fulfillment.
8 frightful: The same word recurs at line 10, where it is rendered “terrible.” It is a noun
in ancient Greek, and its adjectival form is used once of the monster Ekhidna
(Orphic fragment 81.2) and once of Ares (Oracula Sibyllina 13.78). These are the
only appearances of the word and its cognates in ancient Greek. A closely related
adjective is used of the Erinyes at OH 69.8 (“dreaded maidens”).
9 paralyzing the limbs with madness: Insanity is typical of how the Erinyes lay low
their victims, as they themselves mention in their binding spell over Orestes at
Aeschylus Eumenides 329–330 and 342–343. It is again notable that the Eumenides
are  attributed  with  a  negative  function  normally  associated  with  the  Erinyes.
Deliverance  from  madness  or  frenzy  appears  elsewhere  in  the Hymns:  see OH
71.11n.
10 snake-haired, terrible maidens of the night: The Erinyes are also described as
“snake-haired” (OH 69.16; same metrical position), and there are only two other
appearances of this word in ancient Greek. It is again used of the Eumenides by the
first-century AD philosopher Annaeus Cornutus, and it is one of the many epithets
lavished upon Moon in her hymn in the magical papyri (PGM 4.2863). This hymn
bears  many  striking  verbal  similarities  to  ours:  in  addition  to  this  word,  both
goddesses are dark (line 6 ~ 4.2863), eat flesh (see note to lines 6–7), inflict
madness (line 8 ~ 4.2868; see also OH 71i), and are “nocturnal” (line 9 ~ 4.2855).
The Eumenides' connection with the night is established in this line as well, and the
word translated here as “of the night” is the same one translated as “nocturnal” in the
hymn  to  the  Erinyes  in  the  same  metrical  position  (OH 69.3); for other close
similarities between these two hymns, see the notes to lines 4–5 and 8.

71. To Melinoe
Melinoe is an obscure figure. This hymn is the sole literary testimony of her existence,
and the only other appearance of her name is found inscribed on a magical device,
which was presumably used for divination (see Morand 2001, pp. 185–88). On this
device, the name appears with others (including Persephone) in an invocation to Hekate.
An affinity of Melinoe to Hekate is found in the Hymns. Both are “saffron-cloaked”
(line 1 ~ OH 1.2), called “nymph” (line 1 ~ OH 1.8), and are invoked to come in good
spirits. They also are active at night (line 9 ~ OH 1.5). Hekate is elsewhere associated
with driving mortals mad (see note to line 11 and OH 1i). However, the two are not
quite the same in the collection, as they do not share the same father. Melinoe is
represented more as an infernal, psychic force—a spectral embodiment of Persephone's
anger that irrationally lashes out at mortals—and hence the need to appease her. Hekate,
too, was commonly believed to be capable of inflicting insanity by means of such
spooks.  Melinoe's  ability  to  cause  madness  or  insanity  here  is  reminiscent  of  the
Eumenides' similar capability described in the previous hymn. There are other explicit
connections between the two, which explains why the hymn to Melinoe follows that of
the Eumenides (see OH 69i). It is particularly significant that they are born from
Persephone,  especially  since  she  is  not  the  traditional  mother  of  the  Eumenides.
Melinoe is asked to “show to the initiates a kindly ... face” (line 12), and the word for
“kindly” (“eumenes”) is the root from which the name Eumenides is derived. Moreover,
the name Melinoe might provide a further clue. One possible meaning of this word is
“gentle-minded,” which would be quite analogous to the euphemistic name Eumenides
(see OH 70i). However, the name may also be derived from a Greek word meaning
“yellow” and thus be a euphemism for Hekate in her role as a moon goddess (see
Ricciardelli 2000, p. 495). Moon is described as “amber-colored” (OH 9.6), and both
goddesses receive the same offering (aromatic herbs). Madness was also associated with
the moon in antiquity, as can be seen in the etymology of the English word “lunatic,”
which  is  derived  from  Latin  “luna”  (“moon”);  see  also OH  1i  and OH  70.10n.
Nevertheless, given the lack of evidence, we should probably not pedantically press for a
meaning. The name Melinoe could very well have had both connotations, the color and
the mood, for the initiates, however her name was generally understood. In any event,
Melinoe should be considered to belong to the cluster of goddesses that include Hekate,
Moon,  Artemis,  and  Persephone,  here  assimilated  to  a  degree  (by  genealogy  and
function) to the Erinyes/Eumenides pair.
1 saffron-cloaked: The epithet occurs in the same metrical position in Hekate's hymn

as well as in Hesiod's description of Enyo (one of the Graiai) and the Okeanid
Telesto (Theogony 273 and 358, respectively). Homer uses it of Dawn, and Alkman
of the Muses (PMGF 46). “Saffron-cloaked” here might just be a decorative epithet,
or it could be a play on the color implied by Melinoe's name (see the introduction to
this hymn). If Melinoe is another name for Hekate in her capacity as moon goddess,
then the choice of the word might be a conscious play on Homeric usage, connecting
diurnal and nocturnal light.
1 nymph
: This does not designate Melinoe as a member of a group of lesser divinities,
but rather a young woman of marriageable age; see OH 51i. The singular is also used
of Hekate (OH 1.8) and Tethys (OH 22.1; here it means “bride”).
2–3: Very similar phrasing is found in the hymn to Adonis (OH 56.9), who is also born
from Persephone.
2 Kokytos: A river in the underworld; its name means “wailing.” It is mentioned once
more in the collection as the location of the dwelling of Chthonic Hermes (OH 57.1),
just as the Styx marks the home of the Erinyes (OH 69.4) and Acheron is the throne
of Hades (OH 18.10). According to Orphic fragment 340, the souls of those who
committed injustices in their lives come to Tartaros by way of Kokytos (see OH
18.2n).
3 Kronion: A common epithet of Zeus, meaning “son of Kronos.”
4–5: The story is obscure, and interpretation is made more difficult by the fact that the
original Greek is problematic, perhaps corrupt. The “wily plots” are necessary since
Persephone is probably already the bride of Hades. Most likely they indicate that
Zeus had disguised himself, as he often does in his amorous pursuits. In Orphic
mythology, he took the form of a snake when he fathered Dionysos by Persephone.
Since Dionysos has the same parentage in the Hymns (OH 30.6–7), it is possible that
this act was understood by the initiates to have also produced Melinoe; see OH 29i.
The snake, as symbol of chthonic powers, would be an appropriate form to produce
such  an  infernal  creature,  and  both  Dionysos  and  Melinoe  are  connected  with
madness. Compare Odyssey 11.633–635, where Odysseus is afraid that Persephone
might send a ghost or a monster after him during his stay in the land of the dead.
8–9 shining in darkness— / ... gloom of night: Melinoe's activity at night belies her
chthonic nature. Line 8 has been interpreted to allude to different phases of the
moon (Ricciardelli 2000, p. 498). Compared with the rest of the hymn, though, it
seems more likely that the various stages of visibility are more naturally understood
as a concrete extension of how Melinoe vexes mortals. Shining (or gleaming) in
darkness is found also in the hymn to Night, describing both her (OH 3.7) and the

fears she is asked to disperse (OH 3.14).
10  O  queen  of  those  below: Almost the same exact phrase is used of Melinoe's
mother, Persephone, in OH 29.6 (“queen of the netherworld”).
11: A very similar request is made of Pan (OH 11.23+7n). For the madness caused by
Pan (“panic”), see OH 11i. It is typical that a divinity has the power to cure what lies
in its power to cause. Dionysos is able to remove madness as well as bring it (see OH
53i). Rituals to cure madness are attested for the Korybantes, Kybele, and, possibly,
Hekate;  see  Dodds  1951,  pp.  75–80  (particularly  pp.  77–78.).  Rhea  is  often
identified with Kybele, and so it is not surprising to find that she, like Melinoe, has a
connection to madness in the Hymns (see OH 14.3+n), although she is invoked at the
end of her hymn to banish “death and the filth of pollution,” not madness. The
Korybantes were connected with Rhea-Kybele, and it might be the case that their
rituals to alleviate madness were not distinct from but rather part of Kybele's. Their
namesake Korybas bears some affinity to Melinoe in this regard; he is summoned to
avert fantasies (the Greek word is related to that of “apparitions” in line 6) from the
soul (OH 39.4 and 10), as well as fear (OH 39.3) and anger (OH  39.9).  The
collection's concern with madness is probably to be understood in light of the overall
strategy in summoning divinities. Encountering the divine is always a risky endeavor;
one can never be certain how one stands in the eyes of such beings. Contact with the
more-than-human carries with it the danger of losing one's speech, one's senses, even
one's sanity. This concern is reflected throughout the collection in that many of the
hymns either explicitly ask that madness be driven away or implicitly do so by
requesting the divinity addressed to come with a peaceful disposition; see OH 30i
and OH 69i and further Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 146–148, 155–156. Comparable is
the petition at the end of the hymn to Dream that requests “do not through weird
apparitions show me evil signs” (see OH 86.18+n); note that the shapes of Melinoe
are also described as “weird” (line 7).
72. To Tyche
Tyche, which is the Greek word for “fortune” or “chance,” is the personification of a
concept that became very prominent in Hellenistic and especially in Roman times. She
is not found in Homer but Hesiod counts her among the Okeanids (Theogony 360).
Similarly,  we  find  a  Tyche  among  the  nymphs  who  were  picking  flowers  with
Persephone before she was abducted by Hades (Homeric Hymn to Demeter 2.420; see
also Orphic fragment 387, from a similarly themed poem attributed to Orpheus). It is
not clear whether they were conceived as individual personifications of the concept

tychē or if the name is merely a “speaking name.” We do find Tyche personified outside
of epic. Alkman calls her the daughter of Forethought and sister of Eunomia and
Persuasion (PMGF 64). Pindar addresses her as “Tyche the Savior” at Olympian Odes
12.2 and elsewhere numbers her among the Fates as their mightiest member (fragment
41, preserved by Pausanias 7.26.8; see also below). The tragedians of the fifth century
occasionally mention a personified Tyche. In Euripides' Kyklops, Odysseus utters a short
prayer to Hephaistos and Sleep for help in blinding the Kyklops, and at the end of the
prayer he claims that if the gods fail to heed his request, it will be necessary to regard
“tychē” as a “divinity” and one more powerful than the gods (606–607). The concept,
even in its personified aspect, has been tenacious and one that still survives in Greece.
Tyche as an actual goddess instead of a mere personification of an abstract idea does
not seem to occur until the fourth century BC, when what we might call a folk religious
attitude emerges, as is evidenced by the picture gleaned from the orators and the poets
of New Comedy. Tyche becomes a sort of “Lady Luck,” who may bring unexpected
fortune (or disaster) to enterprises. A parallel development is the concept of a personal
Tyche  that  attends  an  individual  from  birth  and  is  “responsible”  for  that  person's
fortunes in life. This is a concept akin to the Fates “weaving” each person's destiny; see
OH  59.15n,  and  compare  the  stars'  role  in  personal  destiny  (OH  7i).  Pindar,  as
mentioned above, included Tyche among the Fates and the plural Tychai are personified
and mentioned alongside the Fates in the magical papyri. Mesomedes identified both
Tyche and Fate with Nemesis in his hymn to that goddess (see OH 61i). For a brief
summary of this transformation of Tyche in the fourth century, see Mikalson 1998, pp.
62–63. In terms of cult, there is no evidence of any before the fourth century BC, unless
Pausanias' description of a statue of Tyche in Smyrna carved by Boupalos, who was
active in the sixth century BC, was used as a cult figure (4.30.6). According to Pausanias,
this was the first depiction of Tyche with a heavenly sphere above her head and of her
holding in one hand the horn of Amaltheia (later known as the cornucopia, or “horn of
plenty”), the wonder-goat who suckled the infant Zeus (see also Pausanias 7.26.8). The
horn is common in the iconography of Tyche in later times. Pausanias also mentions a
statue of Tyche holding the infant Wealth in her hands in her sanctuary at Thebes from
the early fourth century (9.16.1–2). Tyche became particularly associated with the
protection and foundation of cities, and it is interesting to note that already Pindar,
according to Pausanias, is said to have called her “pherepolis” (“she who supports the
city”; Pausanias 4.30.6 = Pindar fragment 39).
An anonymous poetic fragment in hymnic style addressed to Tyche is preserved by
Stobaeus (1.6.13 = PMG 1019). This fragment emphasizes the blessings she may bring,
and  notable  is  the  light  imagery  that,  as  often  in  Greek  poetry,  is  symbolic  of
deliverance from ills (compare the Pindar Olympian Odes 12). In our hymn, Tyche is
just as capable of granting wealth as poverty. Furthermore, as is appropriate for this

collection, she takes on a more chthonic coloring than elsewhere (except, perhaps, in the
Homeric Hymn to Demeter and the related lost Orphic work). She has been ostensibly
integrated into the Dionysian-Orphic scheme. For the position of this hymn and the next
in the collection, see OH 69i.
2  goddess  of  the  roads:  Hekate  is  normally  associated  with  roads,  particularly
intersections (see OH 1.1). It seems that Tyche is here being assimilated to Hekate
(see OH 36.2), and it is perhaps not a coincidence that this hymn follows after the
one  to  Melinoe,  who  also  has  similar  associations  (see OH  71i).  In  Hesiod's
Theogony, Hekate is similarly represented as being capable of granting numerous
kinds of blessings to those she favors but also of withholding such gifts when she so
chooses (see OH 1i, and compare with lines 6–8 in this hymn). The identification
with “Artemis the guide” in the following line reinforces this supposition, as Artemis
is but another aspect of Hekate (see OH 36i). We also find mention of Moon in this
connection, and it is interesting to note that Tyche is invoked as another name for
Moon in the magical papyri—in fact, right after the name “Selene” (PGM 4.2665).
Tyche is not one of the divinities mentioned in Orpheus' address to Mousaios, which
perhaps speaks for her identification with Hekate-Artemis-Moon in the collection.
4 Eubouleus: In our hymns, this is another name for Dionysos, Zeus, and Adonis. In
Orphic cosmogony, it is also another name of Protogonos (see OH 6i). Here it seems
to be used of Zeus, who is the father of Artemis. See OH 41.8n.
73. To Daimon
In Greek, the word “daimōn” denotes a vague appellation of divine force, sometimes
personified, but more often not. All divinities can be called a daimōn, and so can human
beings after they have died. The Golden Race in Hesiod's myth of the five races become
such figures after their extinction (Works and Days 121–126); in later times, it was
common to refer to the deceased as a daimōn in grave inscriptions. The modern idea of
a demon, that is, a malevolent supernatural entity, is first attested for Xenokrates, one of
Plato's students. For the overlap and distinction between daimōn and god, see Burkert
1985, pp. 179–181. The ancient Greeks did not like unexplained phenomena and often
cast about for something to firmly ground their understanding of the source of their
experiences (see also OH 59i). Desire in early Greek poets, for example, is not an
emotion welling from within, but an external force that emanates from the eyes of the
beloved. Sokrates attributed the premonition he felt before engaging in an action to be
somehow “daimōn-like.” Indeed, in speaking of divine activity, the ancient Greeks often
took such careful precautions. An unknown cause of an event can be expressed by

saying “a god” or “some god” willed it to be thus, and the efficacy of divine power
might be qualified by, e.g., statements that the gods “somehow” or “in some way”
accomplish such and such. The concept of daimōn coheres to a large extent with this
sentiment and provided a sort of a blank check, as it were, for causal explanations. It
was particularly linked to individual fortunes, both good and bad.
It is specifically in this capacity that we find daimōn worshipped as a household god,
where the concept is personified to a degree and the entity so produced called Agathos
Daimon  (Good  Daimon).  Libations  poured  before  the  drinking  of  wine  could  be
accompanied with an invocation to this divinity, and at symposia he would be invoked
along with Zeus Soter (the “savior”) and Hygieia (see OH 68i). The connection with
personal  fortune  brings  Agathos  Daimon  in  contact  with  (Agathe)  Tyche  (Good
Fortune), and they are often found together. In Isidoros' hymns (first century BC) Isis is
associated with Agathe Tyche and another Egyptian goddess, Renenutet, who was
connected with individual fortunes. This figure has a male consort, Sokonopis, who
corresponds to Renenutet's consort Shay and whom Isidoros identifies with Agathos
Daimon (see Vanderlip 1972, p. 6). (Agathe) Tyche and (Agathos) Daimon are also
sometimes invoked together in the magical papyri.
Our author seems to be intentionally incorporating elements of Agathos Daimon in
this hymn, particularly the concern for material blessings and his connection with Tyche
(subtly expressed thematically and linguistically). That the addressee is twice called
Zeus, however, indicates something more. The wealth discussed in this hymn primarily
refers to agricultural wealth (cf. “livelihood” in line ). It is not surprising, then, that
there are a number of points of contact between this hymn and others in the collection
addressed to chthonic deities connected with agriculture, particularly Hades. This god is
sometimes addressed as “Chthonic Zeus,” as we find in the hymn to Plouton (see OH
18.3+n). Thus Daimon might represent a particular aspect of Hades. However, it is
much more likely that it is Zeus himself that is being addressed. Despite being a
celestial god, Zeus was also intimately involved in fertility. Rain is necessary for the
crops to grow, and, as the god who sends the rain, Zeus may legitimately be called the
one “who gives livelihood to mortals” (line 2). Moreover, worship of Zeus had a
chthonic aspect as well, particularly as a tutelary household god. In this, he bears a close
affinity to Agathos Daimon, and it would be quite natural to refer to Zeus as Daimon.
Two particular incarnations of Zeus that seem relevant to this hymn are Zeus Ktesios
(Zeus of Wealth) and Zeus Meilikhios (Zeus the Gentle); see the notes to lines 2 and 4.
It should also be mentioned that the other hymns addressed to Zeus focus on the
celestial side of this god, particularly as the great weather god (OH 15 and OH 19–20).
It would be very strange if the chthonic side, one that was quite prevalent in actual
religious practice and that is particularly germane to our cult, would be neglected in the
collection. Comparable, perhaps, is the separate treatment of Hermes and Chthonic

Hermes (see OH 57i). When calling on the gods, the Greeks preferred to err on the side
of inclusiveness.
Three different daimōn figures are mentioned in Orpheus' address to Mousaios.
There we find a bifurcation into a “holy” daimōn opposed to a daimōn responsible for
the ills that befall mortal men (line 31); the holy daimōn is presumably responsible for
the beneficial events and might actually have been considered to be Agathos Daimon by
the cult. The next line speaks of divinities (daimones) who inhabit every nook and
cranny of the cosmos. Consistency might be imagined by postulating a hierarchy of
daimones: a Zeus-daimōn at the head, followed by a personification of two aspects of
Daimon—one  good,  one  bad—and  finally  an  acknowledgment  of  the  plurality  of
daimones that are connected with the various individual fortunes. But perhaps we should
not  overly  press  for  a  systematic  theology;  the  notion  of  a daimōn  is  very  fluid,
encompassing many senses and fulfilling different functions. The hymns capture both
the idea of a race of guardian spirits, already found in Hesiod (see OH 69.9n) and the
personified abstraction of such an idea, as seen in the person of the Agathos Daimon.
The hymn to Tyche would naturally suggest one for an individualized daimōn, a female-
male pairing that is repeated in the subsequent hymns to Leukothea and Palaimon as
well as throughout the collection (see OH 14.8–9n). The identification of Daimon with
Zeus in his chthonic aspect is natural and another example of the complex web of
associations that form the tissue of our collection.
2 gentle: This same adjective is used of Tyche in the same exact place in the previous
hymn. The daimones mentioned by Orpheus in his opening address are included
among divinities referred to as “gentle.” The Greek word, “meilikhios,” is also a cult
title of Zeus. Under this name, he was worshipped both as a household and polis
divinity. The power to grant good or bad fortune was his, and sacrifices were made
as a way to stay in this god's good graces. An overview of Zeus Meilikhios (and
other similar incarnations) may be found in Larson 2007, pp. 21–23.
2 who gives birth to all: Zeus is often considered the father of gods and men, and the
epithet “who gives birth to all” is also used in the hymn of Astrapaios Zeus (OH
20.5, translated there as “begetter of all”). See also OH 15.3–5+n. A very similar
epithet is used of the sky gods Sky (OH 4.1) and Kronos (OH 13.5), as well as Zeus'
son Herakles (OH 12.6). This also speaks against interpreting Daimon as Hades in
this hymn.
4  giver  of  wealth:  Cognates  of  the  epithet  translated  here  as  “giver  of  wealth”
(“ploutodotēn”) are used to describe Demeter (“giver of all,” OH 40.3) and Hades
(“you give the wealth of the year's fruits,” OH 18.5). We also find it used to
characterize one of the functions the Golden Race possesses after they die out and

become daimones (Hesiod Works and Days 126). Isidoros applies this epithet to both
Isis-Renenutet-Tyche (1.1) and Sokonopis-Agathos Daimon (2.10). At the end of a
spell in the magical papyri that details the construction of a phylactery to bring
success, the god addressed is invoked as Aion, giver of wealth, and Agathos Daimon
(PGM 4.3165–3166; for Aion, see OH O.28–29n). Zeus Ktesios (Zeus of Wealth) is
also called “ploutodotēs.” This is another aspect of Zeus, similar in function to that
of Zeus Meilikhios (see Larson 2007, p. 21). Very relevant for our hymn is that Zeus
Ktesios is found with Tyche and Asklepios as a trinity of household divinities
capping a list of gods in a late dedicatory inscription found in Stratonicea (Asia
Minor). Pausanias reports that Zeus Plousios (Zeus of Wealth) had a temple in
Sparta (3.19.7).
74. To Leukothea
Leukothea, the “white goddess,” is represented in literature as a sea divinity. Her first
appearance is in the Odyssey, where she attempts to aid the foundering Odysseus
(5.333–353). She was once the mortal named Ino, one of the daughters of Kadmos and
a sister of Semele, Dionysos' mother (Hesiod Theogony 975–976). Both names are
mentioned together at OH O.34. Ino became the nurse of Dionysos after Semele had
been incinerated by Zeus' magnificence (see OH 44i). A jealous Hera drives Ino's
husband, Athamas, insane, and he kills their older son, Learkhos. A terrified Ino scoops
up the younger son, Melikertes, and is chased by the raving Athamas until she reaches a
precipice overlooking the sea. Cornered, she plunges herself and her son into the sea.
The sea divinities take pity on her and transform her into one of their own. She receives
a new name, Leukothea. Melikertes, too, is transformed and becomes the god Palaimon
(see  further OH  75i).  See  Ovid's Metamorphoses  4.416–542,  and  for  a  somewhat
different account, Apollodoros 3.4.3. In other versions of the myth, Ino kills or attempts
to kill the children of a previous wife of Athamas, Nephele (Apollodoros 1.9.1), or of a
later one, Themisto (Hyginus Fabula 4, based on the lost Ino of Euripides; cf. Fabula for a different account). The significance of the name White Goddess is obscure. The
white may refer to the foam of the sea and/or the complexion of her skin; compare the
names of the sea-nymphs Galatea (“gala” = “milk”) and Tyro (“turos” = “cheese”).
Leukothea played an important role in cult. Aristotle reports that the Eleans asked
Xenophanes (later sixth century BC) whether they should sacrifice and sing dirges to
Leukothea; he answered that if they thought she was a goddess, they should sacrifice but
not lament, but if they thought she was human, then they should lament but not sacrifice
(Rhetoric 1400b5–8). Cicero, writing in the first century BC, mentions that Leukothea
was worshipped throughout Greece (De natura deorum 3.15). The Megarians believed

that the corpse of Ino had washed up on their land, and they claimed that they were the
first to call her Leukothea (Pausanias 1.42.7); they also thought the rock from which she
jumped was in their territory (Pausanias 1.44.8). Ino was worshipped in a few places in
Lakonia. At Epidauros Limera, people would throw barley cakes into a lake. If the cake
sunk, it was a sign of the goddess' acceptance; if it floated, it indicated her rejection
(Pausanias  3.23.8).  There  was  also  a  dream  oracle  on  the  road  to  Thalamai;  the
sanctuary had bronze statues of Sun and Pasiphae, who Pausanias claims was not a
native goddess and whose name was a title for Moon (3.26.1). For more on dream
oracles,  see OH  86i.  Leukothea  is  invoked  along  with  Hermes,  Hekate,  Ploutos,
Persephone,  Artemis,  Demeter,  and  anonymous  heroes  to  protect  a  grave  in  an
inscription found in Pantikapaion (modern day Kerch); all of the deities have the epithet
“chthonian.” A cultic connection with Dionysos is perhaps to be read in an inscription
on  an  altar  found  in  Syria.  It  reads  “the  vineyard  of  the  goddess  Leukothea  and
Melikertes. Asklas, son of Thaddaios, dedicated the altar at his own expense out of
piety” (Sartre 1993, p. 52). The context is unclear, but in the mention of a vineyard
belonging to Leukothea and Melikertes it is tempting to read a Dionysian association,
perhaps in a cultic context (also see the collection of inscriptions in Sartre's article for
more Leukothea inscriptions from Syria). Pausanias reports that in Lakonian Brasiai the
inhabitants  claimed  that  the  wandering  Ino  arrived  and  consented  to  be  nurse  to
Dionysos, who had washed up on shore (cf. Melikertes); he also saw the grotto where
she brought up the infant, and he learned that the plain was called the Garden of
Dionysos (3.24.3–4). The grotto might have housed a cult, but Pausanias gives no
indication of one. The theme of a wandering goddess bereft of her child and nursing
another's as a surrogate is found in the story of Demeter, who after the abduction of her
daughter Persephone wanders the world in disguise and eventually becomes a nurse to
the infant Demophoön at Eleusis (see OH 41i).
The  connections  with  Dionysos  and  indications  of  chthonian  character  make  it
unsurprising to find her addressed in our collection. In addition, the rebirth of a mortal
into a god (cf. the question of the Eleans to Xenophanes) is consonant with the hopes of
initiates  in  such  cults,  as  the  Bacchic  gold  tablets  attest.  Furthermore,  another
inscription found in Syria (also in Sartre's article) mentions the apotheosis of the
dedicatee's son in a cauldron used in a ritual for Leukothea of Segeira. It begins with the
Greek version of the Latin formula “for the welfare of the Emperor,” and the emperor
mentioned is Trajan (98–117 AD). What exactly is meant by “apotheosis” (literally or
figuratively understood?) is unclear, but there is perhaps some relation to the versions of
the myth where Ino places Melikertes in a cauldron (e.g., Apollodoros 3.4.3) and might
be trying to revive her son, as suggested by Farnell 1921, pp. 43–44.
It is interesting, though, that this hymn focuses almost exclusively on the maritime
associations, particularly the soteriological aspect already found in the Odyssey. Only the

brief mention of Dionysos in line 2 serves to connect her with the mythological record.
The placement of this hymn and the following hymn to her son is also puzzling. One
would  expect,  perhaps,  a  contiguous  location  to  the  second  one  addressed  to  the
Kouretes, who, in their connection with Samothrace and the Dioskouroi, are associated
with the sea and succoring sailors (see OH 38i). Indeed, an epigrammatic parody of
dedications by Loukillios (first century AD) connects Leukothea and Palaimon (under
their mortal names!) with the Samothracian gods: “To Glaukos and Nereus and Ino and
Melikertes/and  to  Zeus  of  the  Depths  [=  Poseidon]  and  the  Samothracian  gods/I
Loukillios, for being saved from the sea, have shorn/the hairs of my head—for I possess
nothing else!” Both this hymn and that to the Kouretes look toward the deities to
provide beneficial weather, and, as a nurse of Dionysos, Leukothea would fit with the
series of addressees involved in the life of the infant Dionysos (OH 31–39). However,
Leukothea seems to be considered chiefly as a cult figure and thus is included in the
more congenial group (see OH 69i). For the female/male pair of Leukothea/Palaimon,
see OH 14.8–9n.
75. To Palaimon
For the story of how Melikertes, the son of Leukothea, is transformed into the sea-god
Palaimon, see the introduction to the previous hymn. The mortal remains of the boy are
usually  described  as  being  conveyed  to  Corinth  on  a  dolphin.  Games  were  then
instituted in his honor (sometimes by the hero Sisyphos), and these became later known
as the Isthmian Games (see Pausanias 1.44.8, 2.1.8), which, alongside the Olympian
Games, were one of the four main national contests in ancient Greece. The games,
though,  are  sometimes  attributed  to  Theseus  (Plutarch Theseus  25.5).  The  name
Palaimon means “wrestler,” and this name is generally assumed to be due to Palaimon's
association with athletic competitions, since the baby Melikertes could hardly be labeled
a wrestler; it is possible that Palaimon was a separate entity, a divine youth, who later
became merged with Melikertes. Be that as it may, Pausanias reports that the body was
kept in an underground cave (2.2.1), which suggests chthonian rites. In describing a
painting of the reception of Melikertes, Philostratus mentions mysteries (orgia) for
Palaimon instituted by Sisyphos (Imagines 2.16); earlier Aristides (a contemporary of
Pausanias), at the end of his prose hymn to Poseidon (Orations 46.40), similarly alludes
to rites (teletai) and mysteries (orgiasmoi). An inscription containing the laws of a
Dionysian cult at Athens (inscribed before 178 AD) mentions Palaimon (Dittenberger
1920,  no.  1109),  along  with  Dionysos,  Kore  (=  Persephone),  Aphrodite,  and
Proteurythmos, after a series of priestly offices in the context of a sacrifice.
Palaimon,  like  his  mother  Leukothea,  has  connections  with  Dionysos.  They  are

relatives (see note to line 1), and in myth their stories are sometimes connected (e.g.,
Apollodoros 3.4.3). As already mentioned, Melikertes/Palaimon seems to have had
chthonic associations and his own mystery cults, and it is also possible he was part of a
Dionysian one at Athens in the time of the Roman Empire. Furthermore, the “rebirth”
of Melikertes as Palaimon, along with the transformation of Ino, his mother, into the sea
goddess Leukothea, bears some affinity to the dual birth of Dionysos, and such a
transformation is a typical concern of Dionysian and Orphic mystery cults. See further
Seelinger 1998. The focus of this hymn, however, just as in his mother's, is almost
exclusively on the nautical, soteriological element, and there is no explicit mention of
the mythological trappings and cultic associations found elsewhere in Greek literature
regarding this figure.
1 comrade of joyous Dionysos
: Dionysos is technically a cousin to Melikertes, as their
mothers were sisters. Moreover, Ino is often portrayed as the nurse of Dionysos, as
in our collection (OH 74.2+i), and so it is not that much of a stretch to imagine a
closer relation between the two aside from the mere fact of blood relation. In our
hymn, Palaimon is explicitly made part of the Dionysian thiasos, as are others in the
collection; see OH 1.3n and OH 54i. The Nereids are said to “revel in the waves” (see
OH 24.2–3).
6–8: For Palaimon as a savior of sailors, see Euripides Iphigenia at Tauris 270–271: “O
child of lady Leukothea, you who watch over ships, / master Palaimon, be gracious
to us.” The prayer is somewhat humorous, in that the god in his role of saving sailors
is invoked in very different circumstances. Here a barbarian herdsman, someone tied
to the land, calls on Palaimon at the sight of two men on land (Orestes and Pylades)
mistakenly assumed to be gods; the incongruity is further emphasized when the
herdsman asks : “whether in fact these two are the Dioskouroi who sit atop mountain
peaks/or the delights of Nereus, he who the well-born/chorus of fifty Nereids sired.”
The Dioskouroi are Kastor and Polydeukes, who are usually the ones associated with
the protection of seamen in literature. The Hymns mention them in connection with
the Kouretes (see OH 38.21+i).
76. To the Muses
One of the most enduring and endearing creations of Hellenic imagination, the Muses
are the goddesses of artistic and intellectual inspiration. In the epic tradition, they are
represented as the nine daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne (Odyssey 24.60, Hesiod
Theogony 53–62), and their holy voices, often accompanied by Apollon's lyre, delight
the assembled gods and set various young divinities dancing (e.g., Iliad 1.601–604,

Homeric Hymn to Apollon 3.186–206, Homeric Hymn to Hermes 4.450–452). For the
Greeks, the activities the Muses inspire were intimately bound up with religious festivity
and peace. The embassy sent by Agamemnon to attempt a reconciliation with Akhilleus
finds the great hero, this man of violent passions, singing of the famed deeds of the
heroes of old (Iliad 9.185–194). His attention to the peacetime activity of epic poetry
dramatically underscores his refusal to participate in the Trojan War. The dichotomy of
music and battle is expressed in the first fragment of Arkhilokhos: “I am the servant of
Lord Enyalios [= Ares] / and the Muses, knowing their lovely gift.” See also OH
65.5n+i. Early poets often began their song with an appeal to the Muses. It is not clear
whether the “goddess” Homer addresses at the beginning of the Iliad is a Muse, but he
explicitly addresses one at the beginning of the Odyssey (see also OH 77i). Hesiod
begins his Works and Days with the Muses, and in the Theogony we find a more
expansive address in what amounts to a “Hymn to the Muses” (1–114). The convention
is not just limited to the opening of a poem; before launching into the imposing
“Catalog  of  Ships,”  Homer  calls  on  them  for  their  aid  (Iliad  2.484–493). Orphic
fragment 361 mentions that “not even in any way do mortals forget the Muses. For they
are/the rulers for whom the dance and lovely festivities are a concern.” West speculates
this fragment (and perhaps Orphic fragment 362, cited below in the note to lines –10,
which comes from the same source) might have been part of a hymn to the Muses,
which perhaps in turn was the opening part of a larger composition, possibly a theogony
(West 1983, pp. 265–266).
This earliest picture of the Muses as graceful and benevolent deities who inspire
artists and especially poets and who frequently sing as Apollon plays the lyre is the one
that became standard and that was developed in the succeeding centuries. However,
there are alternate traditions. For one thing, their number and names are not entirely
fixed. Pausanias 9.29.2 reports that there was an account of three Muses, named Melete
(Practice), Mneme (Memory), and Aoide (Song). Pausanias subsequently mentions that
the Archaic poet Mimnermos had distinguished between two generations of Muses: an
older one, daughters of Sky, and a younger one, daughters of Zeus (9.29.4). Similarly,
Alkman records two different genealogies in different poems, with one group descended
from Earth and Sky (Diodorus Siculus 4.7.1 = PMGF 67). Mousaios is also supposed to
have mentioned two generations, an older one born in the time of Kronos, and a
younger one born of Zeus and Mnemosyne. What we seem to have here is myth's
propensity  for  doublets,  as  in  the  succession  myths  involving  Sky/Kronos  and
Kronos/Zeus or the two wars known as the Titanomachy and Gigantomachy.
The  Muses  were  worshipped  privately  and  in  public  cult.  Hesiod's  astounding
encounter with the Muses while tending his flocks at the foothills of Mount Helikon
(Theogony 22–34) led him to dedicate a tripod he had won in a poetic contest (Works
and Days 654–659). The special connection between poet and Muse is affirmed by

Homer in the person of the bard Demodokos (Odyssey 8.62–73 and 486–500) and,
negatively, in the story of Thamyris, who boasted that he could outdo the Muses in song
(Iliad 2.594–600). A legend of the poet Arkhilokhos has him meeting the Muses,
disguised as mortal women on the way back from work, in the early morning hours as
he was leading a cow to the market. They asked if the cow was for sale, and when he
replied that it was, they promised him a good price for it. Thereupon women and cow
disappeared, and a lyre lay at the feet of the awestruck future poet.
The most important cult site was probably in the Vale of the Muses at Helikon. The
cult might have already been in existence in Hesiod's time. However, there is scant
evidence for it until the beginning of the fourth century BC, when the town Thespiai was
in control of the cult and strove to increase its importance from a restricted, local affair.
In this the town was successful. During its history, the cult attracted the support from
Greek cities and organizations and in particular from rulers of Pergamon, Egypt, and
Rome. Numerous dedications are described by Pausanias (9.29.1–31.3). The place
evidently became a popular tourist destination. Connected with the site was a festival
called the Mouseia that comprised both musical (at first primarily theatrical it seems)
and athletic events. There are cults to the Muses sprinkled throughout Greece, notably
at Delphi (in connection with Apollon) and Athens. In addition to such traditional
religious expressions, worship of the Muses became connected with private institutions
of learning. Perhaps the most famous is the Mouseion at Alexandria, where the scholars
were supported by the kings of Egypt. (The word “Mouseion” means “place of the
Muses,” and, via Latin, is the source of our “museum.”) Almost a century before
Alexandria, however, Plato established a Mouseion and a private cult to the Muses in
the district of Akademos (whence English “academy”), where his school was located.
Aristotle's Lyceum had one as well, and the phenomenon of dedicating an institution of
higher learning to the Muses and calling it a Mouseion was widespread.
Orpheus as a poet is naturally connected to the Muses through his avocation. The
relationship might have been deeper. Plato suggests that some claimed he was directly
descended from the Muses (Republic 364e), and Pausanias mentions his descent from
Kalliope as one of the falsehoods believed by the Greeks (9.30.4). See also Orphic
fragment 896, 898, 902–906, and OH 24.9–11n; for other Muses, see Orphic fragment
907–908. Orpheus was from Thrace, and the Muses as well at times are connected with
this country and its people. Strabo reports that the Macedonians in his time inhabited
places once occupied by the Thracians where the Muses were especially worshipped and
that the Thracians were the ones to bring the Muses to Helikon (9.2.25, 10.3.17; cf.
Pausanias 9.29.3). Thamyris was Thracian, and in the tragedy Rhesos attributed to
Euripides, the title character, a Thracian, is made the son of a Muse and river god.
This hymn forms a pair with the following one dedicated to Mnemosyne (cf. OH

14.8–9n). For their position in the Hymns, see OH 69i.
: Our hymn follows the more widespread tradition of the Muses' genealogy, and there
seems to be no sign of the older generation mentioned by some Archaic poets.
2 Pierian Muses: Pieria is a mountain to the north of Mount Olympos in Macedonia,
and it is the traditional birth place of the Muses. Of course, the Muses come to live
on Olympos, where they entertain the gods. As mentioned in the introduction to this
hymn, they are also associated with Helikon, and they are sometimes referred to as
the “Helikonian Muses” (e.g., Hesiod Theogony 1).
4 in every discipline: The Muses are the catalysts of all artistic and intellectual activity.
The  association  of  one  specific  Muse  with  one  particular  branch  of  art  (e.g.,
Kalliope with epic poetry) is a later development. See also Murray 2004.
7: The Muses are usually not directly linked with mystic rites. However, the widespread
pedagogical function of the Muses in addition to the role music and dance played in
mystery cults makes it quite easy to attribute to them the revelation of such matters.
The role of their mother, Mnemosyne, in Orphic cult (see OH 77i), as well as the
fact that one of their number, Kalliope, is sometimes claimed to be Orpheus' mother,
also facilitate such a connection; see further OH 24.9–11+n, where the Nereids are
said to have been the first to establish Bacchic rites. It might be suggested in these
lines that the Muses were the source of the rite Orpheus teaches to Mousaios in the
beginning of the collection (see OH Oi); compare the revelatory nature of the Muses
and their epiphany to the poet Hesiod (Theogony 22, 26–28). See Hardie 2004 for
further discussion. In addition to the Nereids, we find elsewhere in the collection that
the Kouretes are credited with being the “first to set up sacred rites for mortals” (OH
38.6+n), the Dionysian thiasos is said to reveal “torch-lit rites” (OH 54.10+n), and
Themis is suggested to be the one who introduced maenadism (OH 79.7–10n). See
also OH 40i. Diodorus Siculus gives a euhemerized account of Dionysos' thiasos,
among whom are a group of extraordinarily talented and educated women called the
Muses who provide entertainment (4.4.3, 4.5.4).
8–10: Lines 8–9 are probably quoted directly from Hesiod Theogony 77–79, who may
have been the first to name these divinities. Our poet deviates from Hesiod's words
in his elaboration on Kalliope, who nevertheless was the preeminent Muse for
Hesiod as well. “Mother” might refer to the tradition that she was Orpheus' mother
(see the introduction to this hymn), and this might further explain the pride of place
given to her. Since the opening address to Mousaios tells us there are nine Muses
(OH O.17–18), Hagne (meaning “holy”) here would either be another name for
Kalliope  (as  we  have  translated  it)  or  refer  to  some  other  goddess,  perhaps

Mnemosyne. The Greek word “hagnos” is used of the Muses in Orpheus' opening
address. According to Pausanias, Persephone was called Hagne in Messene, where
there was a sacred grove containing her statue along with one of Apollon and
Hermes carrying a ram; he then piously declines to discuss the mysteries practiced
there in honor of Hagne and Demeter, which he considers second in rank to Eleusis
(4.33.4–5). It is interesting to note that a river close by is linked to the blinding of
Thamyris (4.33.3). The names of the Muses are significant in that they are in some
way  connected  with  their  musical  endeavors.  The  one  exception  is  Ourania
(Heavenly); her name might be a remnant of the older generation descended from
Sky, as discussed in the introduction to this hymn. The meanings of the names of the
others  are  as  follows:  Kleio,  “celebrator”;  Euterpe,  “well-pleasing”;  Thaleia,
“abundance”; Melpomene, “singer”; Terpsichore, “joy in dance”; Erato, “lovely”;
Polymnia, “many hymns”; Kalliope, “pretty voice.” Orphic fragment 362 is from a
scholiast to Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika (3.1–5c), who discusses a scholarly
debate over the mention of Erato in that poem; one side claimed that, according to
the “Orphics,” she was traditionally the inventor of dancing.
12 glory and emulation
: This might have the connotation of rivalry, albeit the positive
sort that pushes one to reach or surpass the level that another has attained. Compare
the use of the related verb by Hesiod to describe the effects of Good Strife: “One
neighbor emulates the other/who hastens to wealth” (Works and Days 23–24). There
may be an allusion to the “learned contests” mentioned at the end of the hymn to the
Stars (see OH 7.12–13n and OH 33i).
12 lovely and sung by many: The Muses' mother Mnemosyne is also described as
“lovely” in OH O.17, and this word is a play on the name Erato. Likewise, “sung by
many” (Greek “poluumnon”) is a play on the name Polymnia.
77. To Mnemosyne
Traditionally, Mnemosyne was one of Zeus' lovers and gave birth to the Muses (Hesiod
Theogony 53–54 and 915–917). This seems to be the extent of her importance in
traditional myth. According to Hesiod, she herself is the daughter of Sky and Earth
(Theogony 135; cf. Orphic fragment 179) and so one of the original Titans. Her name
means “memory,” and this is a quality that is of utmost importance in an oral culture
and especially for the oral poet. Of course, it continued to be important even as the
Greeks increasingly became a literate society, just as it is still considered advantageous
for someone to possess in our day and age. As mentioned in OH 76i, one tradition
claimed there were only three Muses, one of whom was called Mneme (Memory).

Plutarch  tells  us  that  the  Muses  were  also  known  as  Mneiai,  i.e.,  the  Memories
(Quaestiones conviviales 743d). Poets traditionally start with the Muses or at least invoke
them before embarking on a difficult stretch, and Plato, about to recount to Krito a
conversation in which he recently engaged, somewhat ironically states “as for the rest of
it, Krito, how might I properly relate it to you? For it is no small matter to be able to
recover through narrating such incredible wisdom as I heard. So that I for my part, just
like the poets, need to call upon the Muses and Mnemosyne at the beginning of my
narration” (Euthydemus 275c–d). Hermes in his eponymous Homeric hymn calls upon
Mnemosyne at the start of his song (4.429–430). See further OH 76i. It is quite possible
that  the  goddess  of Iliad  1.1  and  the  Muse  of Odyssey  1.1  is  none  other  than
Mnemosyne herself; the same might be said of the Muse invoked at the beginning of
the Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite (no. 5).
There is very little evidence of cult activity for Mnemosyne. One of the lives of
Aesop reports that he set up a temple to the Muses and placed Mnemosyne among them
instead of Apollon, which incensed the god. In his visit to Athens, Pausanias describes a
private home where Dionysos was worshipped (1.2.5). The god was called Melpomenos
(Singer, and cf. the name of the Muse Melpomene), and Pausanias reports that he found
a statue or picture of Mnemosyne along with Athene, Zeus, and the Muses. It is unclear
if  the  goddess  was  worshipped  here.  However,  two  writers  on  Athenian  history,
Philokhoros (fourth/third century BC) and Polemon (third/second century BC), mention
that wineless libations were poured to Mnemosyne at Athens, as well as to Dawn, Sun,
Moon, the nymphs, and Aphrodite Ourania. The Erinyes also received such libations
(Sophokles Oedipus at Kolonos 100), and the practice implies chthonian rites.
In Orphic eschatology Mnemosyne—or rather her lake—played a significant role. A
number of the Bacchic gold tablets mention this geographical feature in the instructions
that are intended to remind the soul of the initiate what to do once in the underworld.
Indeed, the first line of the first one states “this is the work of Mnemosyne,” and near
the beginning of the eighth it seems that the initiate is called “hero who remembers”
(but the text is somewhat corrupt). While there are some divergences in detail, the
general procedure has the initiate's thirsty soul avoiding the first body of water it
perceives in the gloom, marked by a white cypress tree. All the other souls take their
drink from there, but the initiate's soul is directed to go further along to the Lake of
Mnemosyne (nos. 1, 2, 8, 25). This lake is guarded (by whom or what, we are not told),
and the guards ask the purpose of the soul's visit. The answer to be given is to state that
one is dying of thirst, to ask for a drink and to claim descent from Earth and starry Sky.
The guards then grant a drink, and the soul, after drinking, proceeds to some special
blessed area in the underworld reserved for initiates and/or that holds special distinction
among the dead. For Johnston's identification of the dangerous waters to avoid as the
Spring of Forgetfulness, see OH 85.8n. Our hymn, too, shows a concern for combating

oblivion. The first reference speaks to this in general terms (line 3); at the end, the
prayer is particularized to the “sacred rite.” It might refer to some aspect of the ritual in
which these hymns were presumably employed, perhaps the “learned contests” found in
the hymn to the Stars (see OH 7.12–13n and OH 76.12n). In any case, as the ritual was
drawing  to  a  close,  our  initiates  would  certainly  have  need  to  invoke  memory  to
remember the last remaining hymns and ritual acts (see van den Berg 2001, p. 215, and
Graf/Johnston  2007,  p.  155).  If  they  had  been  active  the  entire  night,  they  were
probably  growing  weary  as  dawn  approached  (see  further OH  78i).  The  contrast
between remembering and forgetting also appears in Orphic fragment 415, from the
Little Krater ascribed to Orpheus. In this fragment the “harmony of the Muses” and all
human  endeavors  granted  by  Mnemosyne  are  said  to  have  been  hidden  through
forgetfulness by time (perhaps Time?) and are preserved for humans by memory.
Finally, of interest, though not directly connected with our hymn, is that Pausanias
explains that before one goes to consult the oracle of the hero Trophonios, he is first
required to drink from the fountain of Lethe (Oblivion) to clear his mind of all things
before encountering the god and then from the fountain of Mnemosyne to remember
what the oracle states (9.39.8); after the oracle is given, the person is put on the seat of
Mnemosyne and asked what he learned from the god (9.39.13). This use of liquid to
induce psychological states is reminiscent of the transformation the consumption of
wine effects; see OH 50i.
78. To Dawn
Dawn (Greek Eos) is the lovely goddess on whom Homer lavishes some of his most
beautiful epithets (e.g., “rosy-fingered,” “saffron-cloaked”). We find variants in her
genealogy. Hesiod makes her the daughter of the Titans Hyperion and Theia and the
sister  of  Sun  and  Moon,  two  other  divinities  with  a  notable  connection  to  light
(Theogony 371–374); she then gives birth with the obscure Astraios to the winds
Zephyros, Boreas, and Notos, as well as to the Morning Star (Eosphoros, “dawn-
bringer”) and all the stars (Theogony 378–382; see also OH 7.3n). In myth, Dawn is
primarily portrayed as a goddess with a fondness for plucking mortal men off the face
of the earth to be her lover, usually with unhappy results. Most famous of all is perhaps
Tithonos.  She  loved  him  so  much  that  she  asked  Zeus  to  grant  him  immortality,
forgetting to ask for eternal youth as well. Eventually she tosses the aged Tithonos into a
closet, where he withers away to a mere plaintive voice and eventually is turned into a
cicada. See Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite 5.218–238. They had two sons, Emathion, who
was killed by Herakles during this hero's western wanderings, and Memnon, king of the
Ethiopians, who was killed by Akhilleus at Troy. Ovid tells in detail the story of her

abduction of Kephalos and his eventual rejection of the goddess in favor of his true love,
the mortal Prokris (Metamorphoses 7.690–862). The hunter Orion was also an interest
of Dawn's, and according to Homer he was killed by Artemis for this relationship
(Odyssey 5.121–124). Homer also briefly mentions a fourth lover, Kleitos (Odyssey
15.250–251). This pattern of behavior was noticed in antiquity, and one reason offered
for it was that Aphrodite had cursed Dawn for having an affair with Ares (Apollodoros
1.4.4). Our hymn takes no notice of such charming tales.
Dawn seems to have had no role in cult practice, although there is a brief hint in Ovid
that  she  was  worshipped  somewhere  (Metamorphoses  13.588:  “For  I  possess  the
scantiest amount of temples throughout the wide world.”); however, this might just be
an understated way of saying that there were no temples to Dawn. It is possible that the
goddess is addressed as Orthria and Aotis in Alkman PMGF 1. This is hotly debated,
but, if true, it would indicate worship of Dawn at Sparta in the Archaic period. The
placement of this hymn in the collection might seem odd at first glance; one would
expect it to be grouped with the hymn to Night (OH 3). However, if the hymns were
intended to be performed in the order transmitted and if the proceedings took place at
night, then the position of this hymn might indicate that it was sung right before or at
the break of dawn (as opposed to the hymn to Night, who is requested to come to the
initiates in the hymn dedicated to her, which is positioned right at the beginning of the
collection; see OH 3i and OH 77i, and cf. OH 54.5+n). While many hymns describe a
divinity in terms of light, this is the only hymn that calls on an entity to provide light to
the initiates. Comparable, perhaps, might be Alkman PMGF 1.60–63, which has been
interpreted to refer to the closing of a nightly ritual at the approach of dawn (see also
OH 7.12–13n). This functional interpretation would also explain our hymn's emphasis
on Dawn in her capacity as harbinger of the day as well as the complete lack of
mythological  dressing,  with  even  genealogical  details  lacking.  Note,  too,  the  close
proximity  of  the  hymns  to  the  three  winds  (OH  80–82),  the  same  ones  Hesiod
designates as Dawn's progeny (see also OH 80.5–6n). Cynical minds recalling the story
of Tithonos will find significance in the fact that it follows the hymn to Mnemosyne.
3 the illustrious Titan
: A reference to Sun, son of the Titan Hyperion; see OH 8.2+n
and OH 34.3+n.
4–5: Compare Theogony 744–761, where Hesiod tells us of the house of Night and Day
located in the underworld; see OH 3i. The one greets the other on the threshold after
discharging her daily obligation, and the house is always occupied by one and not the
other.
6–10: Dawn and her light sending men and beasts off to work is a literary trope, first
attested in Hesiod Works and Days 578–581: “The dawn claims the third portion of

a day's work, / the dawn gives a headstart for journeys and jobs, / the dawn's arrival
sends many men on their way/and puts the yoke on the necks of many oxen.”
Alkman  might  have  expressed  similar  sentiments  in  the  poem  from  which  the
fragment cited in the following note derives. Ovid Amores 1.13 is a witty “anti-
hymn” to Dawn, in which Dawn is criticized for causing men and beasts to work.
The speaker in Ovid's poem harangues the goddess for, among other things, her
spurring the traveler to resume his journey, for the various activities her light heralds
(agricultural, domestic, military, judicial, and scholastic), and especially for her
ending of the sweet nocturnal trysts of lovers. Sappho fragment 104 is largely corrupt
in the second line but also seems to view the coming of Dawn in a negative light:
“Evening, you who bring all that light-giving Dawn disperses, / †you bring the lamb,
you bring the kid, you bring away to its† mother the child.”
11–12: The comprehensive listing of creatures of the sky, sea, and earth to denote the
powers of a divinity is also a literary device. For this, compare the Homeric Hymn to
Aphrodite 5.2–6, particularly 3–5, where this goddess “subdues the races of mortal
men as well as/the birds that swoop from the sky and all the beasts/that are nurtured
in their multitudes on both land and sea,” and the one to Earth, Mother of All
(30.34) whose “beauty nurtures all creatures that walk upon the land, / and all that
move in the deep of fly in the air.” In a similar vein, the Titans are the ancestors of
“the brood of the sea and of the land, then the brood of the birds” at OH 37.5. It is a
variation on the technique of listing domains to indicate the wide-spread power of a
divinity; see OH 10.14–16n. Alkman PMGF 89.3–5 gives a splendid picture of
quietude in a mountain landscape; the whole world sleeps, including “all creeping
things the black earth nourishes/and beasts bred in the mountains and the race of
bees/and the creatures in the depths of the deep blue sea; / there sleep the tribes of
long-winged birds.” It is possible that the original poem contrasted this restfulness
with the hustle and bustle of human activity (another literary trope) that the light of
dawn awakens (see previous note). It has also been suggested that this fragment
might be referring to religious silence and so have been originally performed at a
nocturnal ritual. If this is true, it is certainly possible that the light of dawn, which
would signal the end of the proceedings, was mentioned elsewhere in the original,
thus corresponding to our hymn's possible function, and was perhaps related to the
ritual  during  which  the  first  fragment  of  Alkman  was  performed  (see  the
introduction to this hymn).
14 more sacred light: The light here probably has multiple layers of meaning. In the
first instance, as mentioned in the introduction to this hymn, it could refer to the
light of the coming dawn that would signal the end of the nocturnal ritual context in
which these hymns were originally performed. The qualification “more” perhaps

refers to the torches that would still have been in use for illumination and possibly in
ritual acts. “Light” here might also have soteriological connotations.
79. To Themis
The name Themis means “established custom or law.” She belongs to that class of
deities who are personified abstractions. In myth, she is usually one of the original
Titans, a daughter of Earth and Sky (Hesiod Theogony 135), as in our hymn; sometimes
she is identified with Earth herself (Aeschylus Prometheus Bound 209–210). Hesiod
makes her the second wife of Zeus (after Metis) and says that she bore to him the
Seasons as well as the Fates (Theogony 901–906). Orphic theogony seems to have
agreed with this progeny (Orphic fragment 252–253). In the Hymns, Themis and Zeus
are again the parents of the Seasons (OH 43.1), but Night is the mother of the Fates
(OH 59.1). It should also be noted that there might have been two sets of Fates in
Orphic teaching (Orphic fragment 176), which would perhaps correspond to the duality
found in Hesiod, who makes the Fates daughters of Night earlier in the Theogony (217–
222; see OH 59i). Themis' children reflect her function as an embodiment of the
established cosmic order, and this explains the possible identification of Themis with
Necessity in Orphism (Orphic fragment 250). We also find Themis associated with
prophecy and oracles, particularly as Apollon's predecessor at Delphi; see note to lines
3–6. Pindar makes it Themis who warns Zeus (and Poseidon) about the danger in
pursuing Thetis, who was destined to give birth to a son who would overthrow his father
(Isthmian Odes 8.31–45a). This story is taken up by Aeschylus in Prometheus Bound,
where he also has Themis tell Prometheus (here her son) that the coming war between
the Titans and gods would be won by trickery (201–218). In the lost epic Kypria,
Themis and Zeus plot the Trojan War in order to reduce the population of the earth
(fragment 1); see also OH 61i. Themis might have been involved in this plan as a
daughter of Earth, and it should be noted that Pindar has Themis counsel that Thetis be
married off to Peleus—a subject treated in the Kypria and that eventually leads to the
Trojan War. Despite Themis' connections with Delphi, however, it seems that she played
no role in cult there. Indeed, there is scant evidence for her worship in the ancient
world. At Rhamnous in Attika, she was worshipped in conjunction with Nemesis (see
OH 61i). Pausanias also reports a temple to Themis near the acropolis at Athens (1.22).
For more on her cult, see Larson 2007, p. 179.
This hymn starts a group that seems to recall the ordering according to elements
found in OH 15–29 (see OH 15i). Themis, as daughter of Earth, would represent the
element earth; the next hymns to the winds, air; the one to Okeanos, water; and the one
to Hestia, fire. This would make for a ring composition that would signal that the ritual

was coming to a close. Perhaps reinforcing this notion is that the sequence at OH 15–29,
repeated twice, starts each time with fire and ends with earth, while here it begins with
earth and ends with fire. Given the association between earth and night (chthonic) and
light and day (celestial), this might also reflect the coming day that heralded the end of
the ritual.
–6: Apollon is associated with the Delphic oracle, but there are a number of instances
where he is the last of a line of divinities connected with this institution and Themis
often  appears  in  this  group.  Aeschylus  says  that  the  Delphic  oracle  originally
belonged to Earth, who then gave it to her daughter Themis, who in turn passed it to
the Titaness Phoibe, and finally Apollon received it as a birthday gift (Eumenides 1–
8). Similarly, Pausanias relates that Earth and Poseidon shared the oracle then Earth
passed her share on to her daughter Themis, who then ceded it to Apollon as a gift,
and finally Apollon bartered for Poseidon's share (10.5.6). This peaceful relationship
between Themis and Apollon might also have its origins in the goddess' having
provided the infant Apollon with nectar and ambrosia at his birth (Homeric Hymn to
Apollon  3.124–125).  The  transference  of  the  oracle  is  not  always  so  civilized,
however. Euripides tells a version in which the oracle originally belonged to Earth,
who wished her daughter Themis to possess it, but had it taken from her after
Apollon slew the dragon Python; Earth then took vengeance on the young usurper,
who appealed to his father, Zeus (Iphigeneia in Tauris 1234–1283). See also OH 86i.
In the Homeric Hymn to Apollon (no. 3), it is the god himself who establishes the
oracle.
4–6 as prophetess ... the art of giving laws: Both of these phrases are translations of
Greek words that pun on the name Themis (“themisteuousa” and “themistosunas,”
respectively).
4 Delphic hideaway: A reference to the chamber where the Pythia was supposed to
have inhaled the vapors that brought her to a state of ecstasy. Modern doubt as to the
veracity of the ancient tradition has been challenged; see Spiller, Hale, and de Boer
2002, along with their bibliography.
5 Pythian... Python: A similar close mention of location and figure is found at OH
34.3–4. For the story of Apollon slaying the dragon Python, see OH 34.3n. There are
a number of variants of this myth, and sometimes the dragon is made into a human
brigand (see Fontenrose 1959, pp. 13–27). The reference here to Python as king
suggests he is conceived as human as well.
7–10: Just as Themis is represented as the first to institute oracles, so here she is
represented as the inventor of Bacchic rites (cf. OH 76.7+n), particularly maenadism

(see OH 52i). Other goddesses are also integrated into Dionysian rites (see OH 1.3n).
This also further links Dionysian worship and Delphi; see OH 46i.
80–82. To Boreas, To Zephyros, To Notos
The winds in the ancient world, like other natural phenomena, were objects of worship
and veneration. Tied to the seasons and often associated with specific meteorological
conditions,  they  were  important  for  agricultural  and  nautical  activities.  Already  in
bronze-age Knossos there was a “priestess of the winds.” The winds could be viewed as
an aggregate—winds in general, bad winds, etc.—or distinguished by the direction from
which they originated and thus individualized and personified. The two notions can be
found in the same author. Homer speaks of the winds feasting in the home of Zephyros,
the west wind (Iliad 23.198–201), but also has the winds controlled by the mortal
Aiolos (see OH 23.5–7n). Hesiod says that three winds, Boreas (north), Notos (south),
and Zephyros (west), were born from Astraios and Dawn (Theogony 378–382), along
with the stars (see OH 78i); the other, “evil” winds arose from Zeus' defeat of Typhon,
who seems to have originally been a wind daimōn (Theogony 869–880; see further OH
15i). A similar dichotomy is found in actual worship. Pausanias tells of an altar for the
winds at Titane, where one night out of the year sacrifice is made; of interest to us is
that Pausanias also reports that mystery rites were performed over four pits (one for
each wind?) and that spells supposedly from Medeia were incanted (2.12.1). Akhilleus
prays  to  Boreas  and  Zephyros  to  keep  Patroklos'  pyre  burning  all  night  long;  he
performs libations, and at dawn the winds return to Thrace (Iliad 23.194–230). The
summoning  of  favorable  winds  and  the  banning  of  unfavorable  ones  is  often
accomplished by magic, and Herodotos reports that the Persian Magi used spells to
quell stormy winds (7.191; cf. 7.189, where the Athenians call on Boreas to blow
against the Persians). The individual winds also received worship (e.g., for Boreas, see
Pausanias 8.36.6; for Zephyros, see Pausanias 1.37.2). They, too, are called on to
provide or hold back their force. The request for Boreas, Zephyros, and Notos to be
beneficial in their respective hymns here is a reflex of this old tradition.
There  are  other  personified  winds  from  other  directions.  Homer  knows  of  the
personified east wind, Euros (Odyssey 5.295), for whom there survives a fragment of a
paian composed at Sparta by an anonymous poet (PMG 858, where he is addressed as
“savior” at the end, an epithet that frequently occurs in the Hymns). At Methana, to stay
the Lips, a southwest wind, from ruining vine blossoms, a white rooster was cut in half;
each half was carried by a man, who would run around the vines in opposite directions,
and, when they returned to the starting place, the pieces were buried (Pausanias 2.34.2–
3).  However,  aside  from  the  mention  of  all  the  winds  in  the  opening  address  to

Mousaios (OH O.37), only Boreas, Zephyros, and Notos merit attention from our
author. Note, however, that the second hymn addressed to the Kouretes (OH 38), where
they are identified as both the Samothracian gods and Dioskouroi, portrays them as
winds in general. This seems to reflect Hesiod's influence. For the position of these
three hymns in this collection, see the OH 79i and 83i. They were probably intentionally
arranged in alphabetical order (Greek “zeta” precedes “nu”).
80. To Boreas
Boreas is the north wind, traditionally associated with cold and winter. He is a blustery
sort and is represented as powerful and violent. Vivid descriptions of his frosty might
may be found in Hesiod Works and Days 504–558 and Ibykos PMGF 286.8–13 (see
also note to line ). In myth, he is perhaps most famous for his abduction of the
Athenian princess Oreithyia; their children, Kalais and Zetes, participated in Jason's
quest for the Golden Fleece (see Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika 1.211ff. and Ovid
Metamorphoses 6.675–721). It is in this role as “son-in-law” that the Athenians called
on him to harass the Persian fleet during the battle of Artemision, and for his help they
later built him an altar by the river Ilissos (Herodotos 7.189, and compare 7.178 and
7.191;  see  also  Plato Phaedrus  229c).  The  sons  of  Boreas  had  winged  feet  that
conferred on them the power of flight; see also OH 81.6. Pausanias claims that he read
in a poem (now lost to us) that Mousaios was given the ability to fly by Boreas; the
poem seems to have been attributed to Mousaios himself, a claim Pausanias disputes
(1.22.7).
2 come from snowy Thrace: Boreas is imagined as originating from Thrace, and thus
is Orpheus' countryman. The Greeks in general considered the Thracians a wild and
uncouth  people,  and  the  personified  Boreas  often  takes  on  the  same  rude
characteristics. In Aesop's eighteenth fable, Boreas and Sun try to determine who is
more powerful by seeing who can force a man to take off his cloak. Boreas huffs and
puffs with all his might, which only makes the man wrap himself tighter; Sun merely
turns up the heat which forces the man to disrobe. The moral of the story is that
persuasion is better than force. Ovid seems to be playfully alluding to this tale by
having his Boreas first ask nicely for the hand of Oreithyia and resorting to violence
only when he is rebuked. It is interesting that Homer at times considers Zephyros a
similarly wild wind from Thrace as well (Iliad 9.4–7).
3–4: Compare Lucian True History 2.14, where on the Isle of the Blest the clouds draw
up moisture from rivers of myrrh and then gently release that moisture on the
symposiasts after being squeezed by the winds. For clouds as the carriers of rain, see

OH 82.4.
–6: Since Boreas can bring rough weather, he can perforce bring fair weather (cf. OH
38.14–25). The breaking up of the storm clouds leads to the appearance of the sun.
These lines perhaps indicate the coming dawn and the imminent end of the ritual
during which the Hymns were performed (see OH 78i). See also OH 5.6+n.
81. To Zephyros
Zephyros, originally any westerly wind, came to be thought of as the west wind proper.
He is regarded as a warm, gentle breeze (see, e.g., Hesiod Works and Days 594). Homer
sometimes represents him as a storm wind from Thrace (see OH 80.2n), but Zephyros
also appears as the pleasant wind sent by Okeanos to refresh the dead heroes in the
Elysian Fields (Odyssey 4.561–569). Akhilleus' horses are Zephyros' sons by way of the
harpy Podarge (Iliad 16.148–151); this is not as strange as a union as it may appear,
since the Harpies (Snatchers) were originally storm daimones. Their sister is Iris, and
she also had relations with Zephyros, begetting none other than Eros (Alkaios fragment
327). Note that Orphic fragment 360 gives another genealogy for Eros, saying that this
god was produced by Time and all the winds; see further OH 58.5–7n. Some versions of
the myth of Apollon and Hyakinthos portray Zephyros as a rival to Apollon for the lad.
In this case, the discus that kills Hyakinthos is blown off course by the wind as opposed
to accidentally hitting him (Pausanias 3.19.5). A later epigram attributed to Bacchylides
describes the dedication of a temple to Zephyros by one Eudemos of Rhodes in thanks
for the god's assistance in winnowing (AP 6.53); the altar to Zephyros in Attika, found
near a shrine to Demeter and Persephone on the way to Eleusis, may also have had
agricultural significance (Pausanias 1.37.2).
3–4 loved by harbors / ... gentle passage: In the Odyssey, Aiolos ties up all the winds
except the west wind in a magic bag so that Odysseus may have safe passage home.
The premature release of the winds blows the ship back to the island of Aiolos
(10.19–55;  see  also OH  23.5–7n).  Zephyros,  however,  is  not  the  only  wind
associated with aiding ships; see OH 82i.
6 O light-winged ones: Winds are conventionally represented as winged; compare OH
82.2 and the winged feet of Boreas' sons (see OH 80i). The wings are indicative of
the winds' speed.
82. To Notos

Notos is the south wind and as such opposite to Boreas; compare Bacchylides 13.124–
132, an extended metaphor where Boreas rages throughout the night until dawn while
during the day Notos safely guides the ship to dry land (cf. OH 81.3–4).
4: The Clouds' hymn has the same last line as this one (OH 21.7). Both hymns are
followed by ones addressed to water deities, namely, Tethys (OH 22) and Okeanos
(OH 83). It is a natural placement, since rain was thought to come from the moisture
drawn up by the clouds from bodies of water; Herodotos explicitly says this about
Notos (2.25.2). For philosophical speculation on such metereological phenomena,
see OH 21i and OH 22.7n. The Clouds are “filled with water” (OH 21.3) and wear
“dewy cloaks” (OH 21.6), and Tethys is said to be the “mother of dark [= rain]
clouds” (OH 22.7).
83. To Okeanos
Okeanos was conceived in myth as a fresh-water river flowing counterclockwise (i.e.,
from west to east; see Mimnermos fragment 12 and Stesikhoros PMGF S17) around the
land masses of the world. His wife is Tethys (OH 22.1), and their daughters are the
Okeanids (OH 51.1+n). There are different accounts of his place in the divine hierarchy.
Hesiod considers him to be one of the original Titans, a son of Sky and Earth (Theogony
133). Homer, on the other hand, has Sleep call Okeanos the “begetter of all” (Iliad
14.246); it is unclear whether Homer thought him to be the oldest god or the first god to
initiate procreation; see also OH 3i. This hymn reflects Homeric belief. We find similar
variations in different Orphic theogonies, with Okeanos being counted in the generation
of Titans (Orphic fragment 179) and either among an earlier generation or as the
progenitor of all (Orphic fragment 21–22; cf. West 1983, pp. 117–121; 183–190).
Okeanos might have been rationalized as the sea in the theogony sung by Orpheus in
Apollonios of Rhodes Argonautika 1.495–512; his daughter Eurynome is paired with
Ophion, and they are called the first rulers of Olympos. Water divinities as the first
existing beings are found in Sumerian (Nammu), Babylonian (Apsu and Tiamat), and
Egyptian (Nun, the Ogdoad) traditions, among others. It seems quite likely that such
stories influenced the Greeks. It is also notable that Thales, the earliest Pre-Socratic
philosopher and one who came from Asia Minor, theorized that water was the first
principle, and already in antiquity he was thought to have been influenced by the ancient
tradition; see Aristotle Metaphysics 983b27–984a3, who also mentions that the earliest
theologians (including Orpheus?) thought Okeanos and Tethys were the “parents of
begetting.” In our collection Proteus, another sea god, is endowed with demiurgic
powers; see OH 25.2–3+i. Okeanos played no role in cult. For the placement of this

hymn, see OH 79i. An explanation for why Okeanos would have been chosen to
represent water in this group of hymns as opposed to some other water deity might be
his connection with death (see note to line  and OH 87i). Just as this hymn follows
those addressed to the winds, so too does the hymn to Sea (OH 22) follow the one to the
airy Clouds (see also OH 82.4n). The author of the Derveni papyrus equates Zeus,
Okeanos, and air, but this is introduced as an interpretation that goes against what the
“multitude” believe (see Betegh 2004, pp. 193–200), and nothing in our hymn suggests
any awareness of this doctrine.
3 boundaries of the earth: See OH 11.15. Hephaistos makes Okeanos the outer rim on
the shields of Akhilleus (Iliad 18.607–608) and of Herakles (Hesiod Shield 314–
315). It is not, however, the absolute limits of the world, at least not the world of the
living. Odysseus must cross Okeanos to reach Hades (Odyssey 10.508–512), and
Hesiod places a number of monsters beyond its stream such as the Hesperides, the
Gorgons, and Geryon (Theogony 215, 274–275, 289–292). All of these creatures are
thus death figures. The Isles of the Blest are located near Okeanos (Hesiod Works
and  Days  171;  cf. Odyssey  4.561–569).  Okeanos'  association  with  death  is
strengthened by the fact that the river Styx is his eldest daughter (see OH 69.4n). It
might be that the placement of this hymn, coming near the end of the collection and
shortly before the hymn to Death, is supposed to symbolize the crossing of Okeanos
for the initiate (cf. OH 87.12n). The stars are sometimes described as rising from
and setting into Okeanos.
4–5: Okeanos is naturally seen as the source of all other watery bodies (see also Iliad
21.195–197; line 196 is exactly the same as line 4 in this hymn). This is expressed
genealogically by Hesiod, who reports that Okeanos and Tethys are the parents of
three thousand daughters and an equal number of (male) rivers (Theogony 363–368).
However, Hesiod does not make him the father of the salty seas, as there are older
water deities for this poet to represent them (e.g., Pontos).
8: Okeanos appears as a laid–back individual in myth. He does not fight with Kronos
against their father Sky (Orphic fragment 186) nor does he battle against Zeus in the
Titanomachy (Hesiod Theogony 398; compare the role of his daughter Styx at 389–
403). According to Homer, he and his wife protect Hera during this war (Iliad
14.200–204, and cf. Thetis and Eurynome, an Okeanid, taking in Hephaistos after
he had been thrown out of Olympos by Hera at Iliad 18.394–405 and also Thetis
succoring  Dionysos  in  his  flight  from  Lykourgos  at Iliad  6.135–137).  In  the
Prometheus Bound, Aeschylus portrays Okeanos as sympathetic to the plight of the
rebel Prometheus, although unwilling to challenge Zeus.

84. To Hestia
Hestia, meaning “hearth,” is, unsurprisingly, the goddess of the hearth. Despite being a
full-blooded Olympian divinity, she never really becomes fully anthropomorphized.
Consequently, she rarely makes an appearance in literature and art. Homer does not
mention her at all. She was the first child born to Kronos and Rhea, and, because she
was the oldest, she was the first to be swallowed by Kronos and the last to be disgorged
(Hesiod Theogony 454, 497). While Orphism seems to have had a similar genealogy
(see Orphic fragment 202), the author of the Derveni papyrus appears to cite from a
poem where Orpheus equated her with Demeter, Deio, Rhea, Earth, and Mother (see
OH 14i). The hymn to the Mother of the Gods in our collection says that this goddess is
also known as Hestia (OH 27.9+n). There are two short Homeric hymns to her (nos. and 29) that briefly touch on her capacity as household goddess (the latter hymn also
invokes Hermes in this role), and they seem to have been composed for the occasion of
the consecration of a new house. She also makes an appearance in the Homeric Hymn to
Aphrodite where she spurns the courting of Poseidon and Apollon; she swears that she
will remain a virgin, and in place of marriage she receives the honor of being the
goddess of homes, including temples (5.21–32). This turned out to be quite an honor
indeed. As goddess of every private domicile's hearth, much of domestic piety was
lavished on her. She received daily offerings, and she was also invoked on special
occasions, e.g., the introduction of new members into the household. Since the temple
of a god was considered a “home” for that god, it is not surprising to find Hestia
worshipped there as well, e.g., Apollon's temple at Delphi (see Homeric Hymn to Hestia
no. 24). As the hearth was a central point unifying the household and temple, so, too,
did communities have a public hearth that promoted the polity's well-being, and thus
Hestia also received state cult honors. The cult of her famous counterpart in Rome,
Vesta, included a college of women whose function was to keep the sacred flame of the
city's hearth continually burning. We find similar instances of the maintenance of an
eternal, pure flame in Greek civic hearths. She was the first and the last deity to whom
libations were poured at a public feast (see Homeric Hymn to Hestia 29.3–6). That she
was the first to be swallowed and the last to be disgorged by Kronos is perhaps a
mythological reflection of this; our hymn's position near the end of the collection might
also have been influenced by this practice (see further OH 79i). In general, though, it
was customary to give her offerings before other gods. Sokrates, about to embark on a
discussion on the etymology of gods' names, asks his interlocutor if they should start
with Hestia, as is the custom, and later notes that Hestia is the first divinity invoked at
sacrifices (Plato Cratylus 401b2 and d1–2). It is not hyperbole to state that she was the
most worshipped divinity in the ancient world as well as the most important divinity in
the daily lives of the majority of people. For more information on the cult of Hestia, see

Larson 2007, pp. 160–62.
2 center of the house
: This probably originated in the plan of the bronze-age megaron,
which had its hearth in the center; early temples, too, seemed to have been planned
around a hearth. The hearth by its nature is a central element in any house, regardless
of its exact physical location.
4 purity: Fire is an element that by its very nature is pure, and this concept of purity
was extended to the hearth fire and, naturally, to the conception of Hestia herself.
She was a virgin goddess, and the women who tended Vesta's flame in Rome were
virgins  on  pain  of  death.  Hesiod  admonishes  his  brother  “not  [to]  sit  by  the
hearth/with your genitals exposed and bespattered with semen” (Works and Days
733–734). For the role of purity in cult, see OH 30.4n.
5 home of the blessed gods: So, too, Sky (OH 4.4); see also OH 5.1n.
8 prosperity ... health: Hestia was imagined to be both benefactress and protectress of
the home; compare the end of the Homeric Hymn to Hestia 29 as well as OH 27.9+n.
85. To Sleep
Sleep, along with the race of Dreams and Death, is a child of Night, who bore this
brood alone (Hesiod Theogony 211–212; cf. OH 3.5, 7). Thus, the last three hymns in
the collection form a natural triplet. In the Homeric epic, too, he is the personified
brother of Death, and Hera enlists his services to put Zeus to sleep (Iliad 14.224–279).
The Greeks felt a close affinity between sleep and death, probably inferring it from the
close resemblance between a body asleep and a body dead. Hesiod says that for the
Golden Race of men, “a sleeplike death subdued them” (Works and Days 116) instead
of death, and both Sleep and Death do honor to Sarpedon, a son of Zeus, by carrying
his corpse from the field of battle to his home in Lykia for a proper burial (Iliad
16.671–673 and 681–883). Pausanias reports that on the chest of Kypselos, Night holds
two infants, one white, who is Sleep, the other black, who is Death (5.18.1). Hesiod
describes a similar scene, although Night only holds Sleep; the poet further contrasts the
gentle  nature  of  Sleep  with  the  hated  figure  of  Death  (Theogony 755–766). This
fraternal relationship between Sleep and Death is emphasized in our collection, as can
be seen in a number of conceptual and linguistic parallels in their hymns: they hold
power over all mortals (OH 85.1–3 OH 87.1–2), they have a liberating function (OH
85.5 OH 87.3–4), and sleep is a kind of practice death (OH 85.7), while death is a kind
of permanent sleep (OH 87.3, 5). Sleep played a negligible role in cult. However,
according to Pausanias, the people of Troizen sacrificed on an ancient altar dedicated to

the Muses and Sleep, claiming that the latter was most cherished by the former (2.31.3).
This probably is a reflection of both divinities' ability to release, albeit temporarily, the
minds of men from the worries and cares of their dreary daily existence (see note to line
).
1–4: The idea that Sleep binds all is found in the epic epithet “pandamatōr” (“all-
subduer, all-binder”), which occurs in Homer and Orphic fragment 223; in the latter
it appears in the context of Zeus' overthrowing of his father, Kronos. The beginning
of book 24 of the Iliad is a beautiful illustration of what happens to those whom this
“all-taming lord” does not visit—the oldest description of the torments of insomnia
(24.1–21).
8 Death and Oblivion ... a true brother: For this relationship to Death, see the
introduction to this hymn. The relationship with Oblivion requires some explanation.
Hesiod makes Oblivion a granddaughter of Night and so a niece of Death and Sleep
(Theogony 227). Oblivion (Greek Lethe) has close connections with Death. It is one
of the rivers in the underworld, whose waters cause the drinker to forget their
previous life. Johnston has argued that in the eschatology found on some of the
Bacchic gold tablets, the body of water the soul of the initiate is instructed to avoid is
the Spring of Forgetfulness (Graf/Johnston 2007, pp. 94–136, passim, especially pp.
116–120; this is opposed to the Lake of Mnemosyne, whither the soul is directed;
see OH 77i). It may be that Oblivion is mentioned here because of Death, and the
relation to Sleep is merely a function of his relation to Death. However, forgetfulness
also has relevance to the living. In the hymn to Mnemosyne, “evil oblivion” is said to
be “alien to her” (OH 77.3), and the goddess is asked to “ward off oblivion” so that
the rite might not be forgotten (OH 77.9–10). On the other hand, oblivion may have
positive connotations. In the hymn to Night, the goddess is said to “free us from
cares” (see OH 3.6), which is a translation of a Greek word that literally means
“causing to forget cares.” This is comparable to the “free us of cares” in line 5 (a
more literal translation of a different Greek word), and it is notable that the “sweet
respite from toil” in this line is almost exactly parallel to the “you offer us welcome
respite from toil” in the hymn to Night (OH 3.6). The sacrifice to the Muses and
Sleep mentioned in the introductory note is also relevant here. Sleep is probably
therefore imagined here as “a true brother” of Oblivion based on this affinity of
function. (Presumably Oblivion is considered the daughter of Night, contra the
Hesiodic  genealogy,  thus  inheriting  some  of  the  powers  of  her  mother.)  Ovid
portrays Sleep dwelling in a cave whence the river Lethe originates (Metamorphoses
11.602–604).
9–10: If the hymns were sung in order at an all-night ritual (see OH 3i and OH 78i), the

position of this one dedicated to Sleep is quite understandable. The initiates would
literally be calling on the god, of whose favor they would acutely feel the need; see
further OH 54.5+n.
86. To Dream
For the genealogy of the race of Dreams, see Hesiod Theogony 211–212 and OH 85i.
Ovid  makes  Dreams  the  sons  of  Sleep,  and  furthermore  “modernizes”  them  by
distinguishing certain specialists who, however, only appear to distinguished persons:
Morpheus  can  take  on  any  human  form,  Phobetor  (aka  Ikelos)  any  animal,  and
Phantasos  any  natural  object  (Metamorphoses  11.633–643).  We  find  a  personified
Dream in the second book of the Iliad, where Zeus wishes to deceive Agamemnon and
so dispatches “baneful Dream” (cf. line  of this hymn) to suggest that Troy will fall if
promptly attacked, when in reality Zeus is planning woes for the Greeks (2.1–40).
Homer compares Akhilleus' chasing of Hektor around the walls of Troy to a dream
where the pursuer never catches the pursued, who nevertheless cannot wholly escape the
pursuer (Iliad 22.199–201). In the Odyssey, Penelope tells her disguised husband that
there are dreams that issue forth from one of two gates; false ones come through gates
of ivory, while true ones through gates of horn (19.559–567; cf. Vergil Aeneid 6.893–
896, where Aeneas returns from the underworld through the gates of ivory). This
dichotomy between true and false revelation is paralleled in Hesiod's epiphany of the
Muses, where the goddesses claim “we know how to tell many lies that pass for truth, /
and when we wish, we know to tell the truth itself” (Theogony 27–28). Euripides gives
an interesting etiology of dreams in his play Iphigeneia at Tauris. Earth, in anger at
Apollon for his taking over the oracle at Delphi from her daughter Themis, sends
prophetic dreams to men as they lie on the ground; the young Apollon complains to
daddy Zeus about the competition, and Zeus simply causes the dreams to stop (1259–
1282; see also OH 79.3–6n). The interpretation of dreams must be one of the oldest
forms of divination; both in cult and literature, there were numerous dream oracles (for
an example, see OH 74i) and more informal dream visions (see, e.g., OH 12.10; note,
too, that the title character of Iphigeneia at Tauris misinterprets one at the beginning of
the play, 42–58). Akhilleus, worn out from dragging Hektor's corpse, falls asleep on the
shore and is visited by the dream-image of Patroklos, who, among other things, briefly
foretells Akhilleus' death at Troy (Iliad 23.54–107). Over two thousand years before
Freud, we find books written to explain the significance of dreams; unfortunately, all
but one, the Oneirokritika of Artemidoros (middle to late second century AD), survives.
We also possess the Sacred Tales (= Orations 47–52) of Aristides (middle second
century AD) that records revelatory dreams sent to him by Asklepios, whose worship had

a connection with dreams through the visions that arose through incubation (see OH
67i).
Our hymn is particularly concerned with dream divinations, but it introduces an
ethical criterion on the basis of which one may receive dreams that signify the future.
Similar ethical criteria are found in the fate of the soul in Orphic eschatology (see OH
13i) and as a constitutive underpinning of the cosmos' structure (see OH 64i). With
physical sleep probably imminent for the initiates, assuming an all-night ritual (see OH
3i), sweet dreams would naturally be a concern.
18 weird apparitions
: Similarly described are the “weird shapes” by which Melinoe
appears to mortals (see OH 71.6–9+11n). And, as is also the case with Melinoe and
other threatening powers, “baneful Dream” is asked to come in his beneficial, not
harmful, guise.
87. To Death
For the genealogy of the personified figure of Death (Greek Thanatos), see OH 85i.
Death is to be distinguished from Hades, although Euripides imaginatively calls Death a
“winged Hades” in his tragicomedy Alkestis 252. Thanatos appears on stage in this play
which treats the story of Herakles wrestling Death for the soul of Alkestis (837–860,
1140). We are told by Pherekydes of Athens that Sisyphos kept Death tied up, until he
was freed by Ares, who consequently served up Sisyphos to him. For obvious reasons
Death and the boatman of the dead, Kharon, sometimes confused even in antiquity,
have totally merged in the modern Greek figure of Charos with whom Digenes and
other  epic  figures  wrestle  in  “the  marble  threshing  floors”  of  folk  poetry.  The
personification of Death is rather weak in this hymn. Its appearance at the end of the
collection is symbolic, forming a ring composition with the theme of birth that occurs at
the beginning with the hymns to Hekate and Prothyraia (see OH 2i, and cf. OH 15i);
birth and rebirth are motifs in the central Dionysian section as well (see OH 44i).
3–4: The idea that the body is a kind of prison for the soul is found in Plato Cratylus
400b–c, where Sokrates discusses three different etymologies for the Greek word for
body, “sōma.” Two of them involve a play on the Greek word “sēma”: the body is
the “tomb” (“sēma”) of the soul or the body is the “marker” or “token” (“sēma”) of
the soul. A third possibility, the one which Sokrates claims seems the best to him, he
attributes to the “Orphics,” who assert that the body is a prison for the soul that
keeps it safe until it “pays the penalty” (“sōma” being derived in this context from
the verb “sōizo,” “I keep safe, preserve”; compare also Plato Phaedo 62b). Plato
does not mention what the penalty is, but presumably he has in mind the Orphic

conception that human beings participate in the Titans' guilt for slaying Dionysos
(see further OH 37i). Mention of retribution for a crime is found on two of the
Bacchic gold tablets (nos. 6 and 7). See also the introduction to the translation.
: There are a number of mythological figures who take on the role of judge of the
dead, such as Minos, Rhadamanthys, and Aiakos; see OH 18.16+n. The punishments
of such luminaries as Tantalos and Sisyphos imply such a judging. Here, however,
the end of life itself is presented as a juridical sentence, a case of an ethical
viewpoint being grafted onto a natural process (see OH 86i). It is “common to all”
(see also lines 1 and 6), because all human beings share in the blood guilt of the
Titans (see previous note).
9: There are, however, exceptions, most notably Orpheus himself, who descends to the
underworld after his wife Eurydike has died. He charms Hades and Persephone with
his music, and they allow him to bring Eurydike back to the land of the living,
provided he does not look back at her until they reach the light. Tragically, Orpheus
is unable to comply and thus loses Eurydike for good. See Vergil Georgics 4.453–
506 and Ovid Metamorphoses 10.1–71; for a possible allusion to this story elsewhere
in the Hymns, see OH 58.5–7n. Sisyphos, too, is said to have convinced Persephone
to allow him to return to life (Theognis 701–712). The descent to and return from
the land of the dead (called a katabasis, “descent”), either literally or figuratively, is
one of the crowning achievements for heroes in mythology (e.g., Herakles, Theseus,
Odysseus, Aineias), as well as for modern figures (e.g., Dante, Faust), and even for
gods (e.g., Dionysos, Demeter, Persephone, Adonis, Hermes). In Aristophanes Frogs
1392, Aeschylus quotes a line from his Niobe (not extant) that “alone of the gods,
Death does not desire gifts.”
12 old age: There is a play on words involving “old age” (“gēras”) and “prize” (“geras”).
The notion of a prize is very interesting in light of the intimations of competition
elsewhere in the collection (see OH 7.12–13n). One of the Bacchic gold tablets
(Graf/Johnston 2007, no. 5) speaks of the initiate “reaching the desired garland by
[her] swift feet.” The imagery of winning a foot race is used metaphorically to
describe the final prize sought by the initiate through participation in the cult,
namely, remaining in the underworld with the heroes or becoming a god (see OH
20i, OH 29i, OH 33i, and OH 41.8n). This idea might be present in the hymn to the
Stars, too. Athletics and struggle were closely connected in the minds of the ancients.
Indeed, the Greek word “athlētēs” (whence English “athlete”) literally means “the
one  who  struggles/contends  for  the  prize”  and  is  particularly  used  for  athletic
contests; the Greek word “agōn” may denote a place for athletic competitions, the
competition itself, or any struggle (cf. English “agony”). Just like an athlete, so, too,

must the initiate struggle and practice discipline in performing the lengthy ritual. Toil
and relief from toil are found elsewhere in the collection (cf., e.g., OH 3.6, OH
85.5+8n), and these are probably not mere literary arabesques but reflect to some
degree the attitude of the initiates to their practices, especially if they shared the
view found among the Bacchic gold tablets that life was an atonement for the crimes
of  the  Titans  (see OH  37i).  This  might  lead  one  to  expect  a  pessimistic  and
dismissive attitude to the world of the living, and there is much precedence for such
in the annals of Greek literature. For example, Theognis says that “of all things, it is
best for earth-bound men not to be born, / nor even to gaze upon the piercing rays of
the sun/but if one is born, then it is best to reach the gates of Hades as quickly as
possible/and to lie under a mass of dirt piled high” (425–28). This is a species of
Greek  pessimism  in  general,  but  the  attitude  was  not  universal.  The  shade  of
Akhilleus could say that he would prefer to be a slave to a poor farmer on earth
rather than a king among the dead (Odyssey 11.489–491), and the Athenian lawgiver
Solon has kind things to say about old age in his poems (fragments 18, 20, 27). The
Hymns evince a positive valuation of life, too (see, e.g., OH 40i+18–20 and OH
68.9+n). They unabashedly focus on the material blessings of the here and now, e.g.,
health, prosperity, peace, and show, interestingly enough, no interest in the fate of
the soul, at least explicitly. Whatever the eschatological views of the initiates, and
whatever the rest of the ritual involved, the performance of the Hymns functions in a
way similar to the story that Akhilleus tells Priam in order to console him (Iliad
24.525–533). Zeus possesses two jars, one filled with good things, the other with
evils. For a human life, Zeus apportions either a little from each jar or all from the
one of evils. It is thus our fate to suffer, and all one can do is cope. The Hymns are
likewise a coping mechanism. They present a world full of uncanny powers that have
the potential to threaten and benefit, and they give the initiate a means of taking an
active role to secure the latter. The means to do so—the performance of the Hymns
(and  whatever  “contests”  the  ritual  involved)—were  perceived  as  arduous.  Like
Herakles performing his Labors, the initiates struggle and suffer. And when they
finish the hymn to Death, which could very well have coincided with the morning
light, they, like Herakles, in a sense have overcome death. The references to sailing
and favorable winds in the collection might be understood metaphorically in this
sense (see OH 83.3n). The experience would have been felt to have changed their
lives, and the new day as symbolic of the transformation. The Hymns offer much for
those  interested  in  various  aspects  of  antiquity:  mystery  cults  and  Orphism,
mythology  and  folklore,  literature  and  literary  reception,  philosophical  and
cosmological speculation. It is easy to lose sight that they were performed by real
people,  with  real  hopes  and  real  fears.  While  their  means  of  addressing  these
concerns  might  seem  strange,  even  bizarre,  to  the  modern  reader,  the  goal  is

something with which anyone can readily sympathize. The Orphic Hymns speak to
human  fundamentals.  And  therein  lies  our  ultimate  fascination  with  them,  and
antiquity in general.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
English translations for most of the primary sources may be found online at the Perseus
Project (http://www.perseus.tufts.edu).
Alexander, Christine. 1933. “Abstract of the Articles on the Bacchic Inscription in the
Metropolitan Museum.” American Journal of Archaeology 37 (2): 264–270.
Arnim, Hans von. 1903–1921. Stoicorum veterum fragmenta. Leipzig: Teubner.
Barker,  Andrew.  1984. Greek  Musical  Writings.  Vol.  1.  Cambridge:  Cambridge
University Press
———. 1989. Greek Musical Writings. Vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Bernabé, Alberto. 2004–2007. Orphicorum et Orphicis similium testimonia et fragmenta.
Vol. 2 of Poetae epici graeci, testimonia et fragmenta. Munich: Teubner.
Betegh, Gábor. 2004. The Derveni Papyrus: Cosmology, Theology and Interpretation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Betz, Hans D. 1986. The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, Including the Demotic
Spells. Vol. 1. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boardman,  John.  1975. Athenian  Red  Figure  Vases:  The  Archaic  Period.  London:
Thames and Hudson.
———. 1989. Athenian Red Figure Vases: The Classical Period. London: Thames and
Hudson.
———. 1991 Athenian Black Figure Vases. Corr. ed. London: Thames and Hudson.
Borgeaud,  Philippe.  2004. Mother  of  the  Gods:  From  Cybele  to  the  Virgin  Mary.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bundrick,  Sheramy  D.  2005. Music  and  Image  in  Classical  Athens.  Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Burkert, Walter. 1972. Lore and Science in Ancient Pythagoreanism. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
———. 1985. Greek Religion. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
———. 1987. Ancient Mystery Cults. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ceccarelli, Paola. 2004. “Dancing the Pyrrichē in Athens.” In Music and the Muses: The
Culture of ‘Mousikē' in the Classical Athenian City, ed. Penelope Murray and Peter
Wilson, 91–117. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davies, Malcolm. 1991. Poetarum melicorum graecorum fragmenta. Vol. 1. Oxford:

Oxford University Press.
Diels, Hermann, and Walther Kranz. 1951–1952. Die  Fragmente  der  Vorsokratiker.
Berlin: Weidmann.
Dittenberger, Wilhelm. 1920. Sylloge inscriptionum graecarum. Vol. 3. Leipzig: Hirzel.
Dodds, Eric R. 1951. The Greeks and the Irrational. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Farnell, Lewis R. 1921. Greek  Hero  Cults  and  Ideas  of  Immortality. Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press.
Fontenrose, Joseph E. 1959. Python: A Study of Delphic Myth and Its Origins. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Furley, William D. 1995. “Praise and Persuasion in Greek Hymns.” Journal of Hellenic
Studies 115: 29–46.
Furley, William D., and Jan M. Bremer. 2001. Greek Hymns. Tübingen: Siebeck.
Graf, Fritz. 1974. Eleusis und die orphische Dichtung Athens in vorhellenistischer Zeit.
Berlin: De Gruyter.
Graf, Fritz, and Sarah Iles Johnston. 2007. Ritual Texts for the Afterlife: Orpheus and the
Bacchic Gold Tablets. London: Routledge.
Green, Peter. 2007. The Argonautika. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Guthrie,  William  Keith  Chambers.  1952. Orpheus  and  Greek  Religion.  London:
Methuen.
———. 1954. The Greeks and Their Gods. Boston: Beacon Press.
Hardie, Alex. 2004. “Muses and Mysteries.” In Music and the Muses: The Culture of
‘Mousikē' in the Classical Athenian City, ed. Penelope Murray and Peter Wilson, 11–
37. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hedreen,  Guy  M.  1992. Silens  in  Attic  Black-figure  Vase-painting.  Ann  Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Hermann, Gottfried. 1805. Orphica. Leipzig: Fritsch.
Holford-Strevens, Leofranc. 2005. The  History  of  Time:  A  Very  Short  Introduction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johnston, Sarah Iles. 1999. Restless Dead: Encounters between the Living and the Dead
in Ancient Greece. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kahn,  Charles.  1975. The  Art  and  Thought  of  Heraclitus.  Cambridge:  Cambridge
University Press.
Kern, Otto. 1911. “Das Demeterheiligtum von Pergamon und die orphischen Hymnen.”
Hermes 46 (3): 431–436.
Kirk,  Geoffrey  S.,  John  E.  Raven,  and  Malcolm  Schofield.  1983. The  Presocratic
Philosophers: A Critical History with a Selection of Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.
Kouremenos, Theokritos, George Parássoglou, and Kyriakos Tsantsanoglou. 2006. The
Derveni Papyrus. Florence: Olschki.
Larson, Jennifer. 2007. Ancient Greek Cults: A Guide. New York: Routledge.
Levy, G. Rachel. 1934. “The Oriental Origin of Herakles.” Journal of Hellenic Studies
54 (1): 40–53.
Linforth, Ivan M. 1941. The Arts of Orpheus. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lissarrague, François. 1992. “Why Satyrs Are Good to Represent.” In Nothing to Do
with Dionysos?, ed. John Winkler and Froma I. Zeitlin, 228–236. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Lobeck, Christian A. 1829. Aglaophamus; sive De theologiae mysticae graecorum causis.
Königsberg: Bornträger.
Long, A. A., and D. N. Sedley. 1987. The Hellenistic Philosophers. Vol. 1. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Loucas, Ioannis. 1992. “Meaning and Place of the Cult Scene on the Ferrara Krater
T128.” In The Iconography of Greek Cult in the Archaic and Classical Periods, ed.
Robin Hägg, 73–83. Athens: Centre d'étude de la religion grecque antique.
Maass,  Ernst.  1895. Orpheus:  Untersuchungen  zur  griechischen,  römischen,
altchristlichen Jenseitsdichtungen. Munich: Beck.
Macdonell, Arthur A. 1917. A Vedic Reader for Students. Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Mikalson, Jon D. 1998. Religion in Hellenistic Athens. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Morand, Anne-France. 2001. Études sur les “Hymnes Orphiques.” Leiden: Brill.
Murray, Penelope. 2004. “The Muses and Their Arts.” In Music and the Muses: The
Culture of ‘Mousikē' in the Classical Athenian City, ed. Penelope Murray and Peter
Wilson, 365–389. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mylonas, George. 1972. Eleusis and the Eleusinian Mysteries. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Nilsson, Martin P. 1961. Geschichte der griechischen Religion. Vol. 2. Munich: Beck.
Nisetich,  Frank  J.  1980. Pindar's  Victory  Songs.  Baltimore,  MD:  Johns  Hopkins
University Press.
———. 2001. The Poems of Callimachus. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nock, Arthur Darby. 1934. “A Vision of Mandulis Aion.” Harvard Theological Review
27 (1): 53–104.
Page, Denys L. 1962. Poetae melici graeci. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pentikäinen, Juha. 2006. “Arctic Primitivism in the European Mind.” In In the Footsteps
of the Bear, ed. Clive Tolley. Pori, Finland: University of Turku and Satakunta

Museum.
———. 2007. Golden  King  of  the  Forest:  The  Lore  of  the  Golden  Bear. Helsinki:
Etnika.
Pickard-Cambridge, Arthur W. 1988. The  Dramatic  Festivals  of  Athens. Rev. John
Gould and D. M. Lewis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Quandt, Wilhelm. 1955. Orphei hymni. Berlin: Weidmann.
Ricciardelli, Gabriella. 2000. Inni orfici. Milan: Mondadori.
Richardson,  Nicholas  J.  1974. The  Homeric  “Hymn  to  Demeter.”  Oxford:  Oxford
University Press.
Rudhardt, Jean. 1991. “Quelques réflexions sur les hymnes orphiques.” In Orphisme et
Orphée, ed. Philippe Borgeaud, 263–283. Geneva: Droz.
Rutherford, Ian. 2001. Pindar's Paeans: A Reading of the Fragments with a Survey of
the Genre. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Samuel, Alan E. 1972. Greek and Roman Chronology: Calendars and Years in Classical
Antiquity. Munich: Beck.
Sargeant, Winthrop. 2009. The Bhagavad Gītā. Albany: State University Press of New
York.
Sartre, Maurice. 1993. “Du fait divers à l'histoire des mentalités: À propos de quelques
noyés et de trois petits cochons.” Syria 70 (1–2): 51–67.
Seelinger, Robert A. 1998. “The Dionysiac Context of the Cult of Melikertes/Palaimon
at the Isthmian Sanctuary of Poseidon.” Maia 50: 271–280.
Segal, Charles. 1989. Orpheus: The Myth of the Poet. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Siddiqi, Muhammad I. 1990. Ninety-Nine Names of Allah. Delhi: Kazi Publications.
Solomon, Jon. 1999. Ptolemy: “Harmonics.” Leiden: Brill.
Spiller, Henry, John R. Hale, and Jelle Zellinga de Boer. 2002. “The Delphic Oracle: A
Multidisciplinary Defense of the Gaseous Vent Theory.” Clinical Toxicology 40 (2):
189–196.
Thom, Johan C. 1995. The Pythagorean “Golden Verses.” Leiden: Brill.
———. 2005. Cleanthes' “Hymn to Zeus.” Tübingen: Siebeck.
van den Berg, Rudolphus M. 2001. Proclus' Hymns. Leiden: Brill.
Vanderlip, Vera F. 1972. The  Four  Greek  Hymns  of  Isidorus  and  the  Cult  of  Isis.
Toronto: Hakkert.
Vermaseren, Maarten J. 1977. Cybele  and  Attis:  The  Myth  and  the  Cult. London:
Thames and Hudson.
Waterfield, Robin. 1988. The Theology of Arithmetic: On the Mystical, Mathematical

and  Cosmological  Symbolism  of  the  First  Ten  Numbers,  Attributed  to  Iamblichus.
Foreword by Keith Critchlow. Grand Rapids, MI: Phanes Press.
Watkins,  Calvert.  1995. How  to  Kill  a  Dragon:  Aspects  of  Indo-European  Poetics.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
West, Martin L. 1968. “Notes on the Orphic Hymns.” Classics Quarterly 18 (2): 288–
296.
———. 1970. “The Eighth Homeric Hymn and Proclus.” Classics Quarterly 20 (2):
300–304.
———. 1971. Hesiod: Theogony. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 1972. Iambi et elegi graeci. 2 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 1978. Hesiod: Works and Days. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 1983. The Orphic Poems. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 1992. Ancient Greek Music. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, Ulrich von. 1959. Der  Glaube  der  Hellenen. Darmstadt:
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Wolkow, Benjamin M. 2007. “The Mind of a Bitch: Pandora's Motive and Intent in the
Erga.” Hermes 135 (3): 247–62.

INDEX NOMINUM
Redundant references (e.g., the occurrence of “Hekate” in the hymn to Hekate) are
generally not included. Geographical and ethnic designations are combined under one
heading where both occur in the notes (e.g., Egyptians under Egypt). If an author is
indirectly cited or not given a reference in the notes, the author's name appears in this
list, not the Index Locorum. Numbers in parentheses after a deity's name indicate the
number of the hymn that is dedicated to that deity, and the entry is in bold font.
Individuals belonging to a group are referred to that group, unless they are significant
independent figures in their own right (e.g., Styx is listed separately from the Okeanids)
and/or the sources offer contradictory accounts (e.g., Dione).
ACHELOUS, note: 25.4–ACHERON, hymn: 18; notes: 18.2, 18.10, 71.ADAMNA, see Attis
ADIKIA, note: 62.ADONIS (56), hymns: O, 55; notes: O.40, 9.4, 14.8–9, 29.6, 30.6, 42i, 46.2–3, 46.6–7, 53i,
57i, 57.1, 60i, 67.5, 68i, 71.2–3, 72.4, 87.9; see also Attis, Eubouleus
ADRASTEIA, hymn: O; notes: 55.3, 59.18, 61i
AER, note: 3i
AESCHYLUS, notes: 40.16, 87.9; see also Index Locorum
AESOP, note: 77i
AGAMEMNON, notes: 25.4–8, 36i, 61i, 69.16, 76i, 86i
AGDISTIS, note: 27i
AGLAIA, see Graces
AGORAKRITOS, note: 61i
AIAKOS, notes: 18.16, 87.AIAS (Lokrian), note: 25.4–AIAS (Telamonian), note: 28.AIGINA, note: 1i
AINEIAS, notes: 51.3, 87.AIOLOS, notes: 23.5–7, 80–82i, 81.3–AION, hymn: O; notes: O.28–29, 10i, 10.18, 73.
AKADEMOS, note: 76i
AKHILLEUS, notes: 24i, 28i, 28.10, 59i, 65.5, 66i, 66.6–7, 69.16, 76i, 78i, 80–82i, 81i, 83.3,
86i, 87.ALEXANDER OF ABONOTEIKHOS, note: 9i
ALEXANDER OF APHRODISIAS, note: 4i
ALEXANDER THE GREAT, note: 46.ALEXANDRIA, notes: 8.9, 29i, 32.1, 34.16–23, 56i, 76i
ALKESTIS, notes: 12.16, 87i
ALKIBIADES, note: 54.ALLEKTO, see Erinyes
ALOADS, note: 65i
AMALTHEIA, note: 72i
AMAZONS, notes: 36i, 65i
AMNISOS, note: 2i
AMPHISSA, note: O.20–AMPHITRITE, note: 24i
AMYKLAI, note: 43i
ANAXAGORAS, notes: 8.16, 21i, 32.8; see also Index Locorum
ANTAGORAS OF RHODES, notes: 58.4, 58.5–ANTAIA (41), note: 10.1; see also Demeter, Hekate, Rhea
AOTIS, see Artemis
APHRODITE (55), hymns: 46, 56, 57, notes: Oi, O.11, O.18, O.19, O.40, 3i, 3.2, 4i, 6.9, 8.1,
10i, 10.1, 10.14–16, 14.8–9, 24i, 27i, 30.8, 42i, 43i, 46.2–3, 51i, 51.3, 56i, 56.4, 56.8–
9, 57i, 57.3–5, 58i, 58.3, 58.5–7, 59i, 60i, 61i, 65i, 65.7, 66i, 68i, 69i, 70.6, 75i
Kypris, hymns: 3, 22, 65; notes: 3.2, 22.7, 59i, 65.Kythereia, hymn: 42; note: 55i
Ourania, hymn: O; notes: O.40, 4i, 55i, 55.1, 77i
Pandemos, note: 55i
Righteous, note: 63i
APOLLON (34), hymn: 24; notes: O.19, 1i, 2i, 8i, 8.1, 8.9, 8.11, 8.12, 10i, 10.14–16, 10.18,
11i, 11.10–12, 12.3, 12.5, 12.10, 17i, 19i, 24.9–11, 28i, 29.6, 30i, 30.2, 32i, 35i, 36i,
36.2, 36.8, 43i, 46i, 51.3, 52.11, 54i, 55i, 56i, 62.1, 67i, 67.1, 67.2, 68i, 70.2–3, 76i,
77i, 79i, 79.3–6, 79.5, 81i, 84i
Alexikakos, note: 67.Bacchos, note: 34.Didymeus, hymn: 34; note: 34.
Epikourios, note: 67.Grynean, hymn: 34; note: 34.Loxias, hymn: 34; note: 34.Lykeios, note: 34.24–Lykoreus, hymn: 34; note: 34.Paian, hymn: 34; note: 34.Pan, hymn: 34; note: 34.24–Phoibos, hymns: O, 34, 35, 67, 79;
notes: 34.1, 34.16–23, 67.Pythian, hymn: 34; note: 34.Sminthian, hymn: 34; note: 34.Titan, hymn: 34; note: 34.APSU, note: 83i
AREION, notes: 17i, 40i, 69i
ARES (65), hymns: O, 38; notes: 2i, 8.1, 27.11, 32i, 32.6, 32.12, 43i, 55i, 56i, 58i, 66i,
70.8, 78i, 87i
Enyalios, note: 76i
ARETE, note: 10.14–ARGES, see Kyklopes
ARGONAUTS, note: 12i
ARGOS, notes: 28.3, 32i
Mount Lykone, note: 36.ARISTAEUS, note: 25.4–ARISTARKHOS OF SAMOS, note: 4.ARISTOTLE, notes: 10.9, 76i; see also Index Locorum
ARKADIA, notes: 11i, 28.8, 40i
Mount Kotilion, note: 34.24–Mount Kyllene, note: 28.Mount Lykaion, note: 34.24–ARKAS, note: 11i
ARKHILOKHOS, note: 76i; see also Index Locorum
ARTEMIS (36), hymns: O, 2, 35, 72; notes: Oi, 1i, 1.3, 1.8, 2i, 9i, 9.3, 9.4, 10i, 10.1, 10.19,
15.10–11, 27.11, 29i, 32i, 32.4–5, 32.10, 34i, 34.1, 35i, 35.5, 40.2, 40.16, 43i, 51i,
51.3, 55i, 56i, 61i, 67i, 71i, 72.2, 72.4, 74i, 78i; see also Eileithyia, Hekate, Moon,
Tyche

Aotis, note: 78i
Bendis, note: 36i
Diktynna, hymn: 36; notes: 36.3, 41.Mistress of Animals, note: 1.Orthia, hymn: 36; note: 36.ARTEMISION (battle of), note: 80i
ASH TREE NYMPHS, see Nymphs
ASIA MINOR, notes: O.39, 1i, 9.4, 27i, 28.8, 36i, 46.2–3, 48i, 73.4, 83i
ASKLEPIADES OF TRAGILOS, note: 42i
ASKLEPIOS (67), hymn: O; notes: 9i, 12.10, 14.8–9, 19i, 34i, 56.6, 68i, 68.1, 69i, 73.4, 86i
Paian, hymn: 67; notes: 11.10–12, 12.10, 34.1, 67.ASSYRIA, notes: 39i, 56i
ASTARTE, note: 55.15–ASTERIA, notes: 1i, 1.4, 35.ASTRAIOS, notes: 62.1, 78i, 80–82i
ASTYNOUS, note: 56.ATHAMAS, note: 74i
ATHENE (32), notes: 9.4, 15.10–11, 16i, 17i, 19i, 26i, 27i, 27.11, 31i, 37i, 43i, 44i, 54i, 55i,
65i, 65.7, 66i, 69i, 77i
Ergane, note: 32.Health, notes: 32.16, 68i
Hippias, note: 32.Nike, note: 33i
Nikephoros, note: 32.Pallas, hymns: O, 32; notes: 6.4, 32i, 32.1, 32.Tritogeneia, hymn: 32; note: 32.ATHENS, notes: 11i, 12.5, 12.10, 13i, 17i, 29i, 32i, 32.8, 32.16, 33i, 36i, 40i, 42.4, 43i,
46.2–3, 48i, 50i, 55.9, 56i, 59i, 60i, 66i, 67i, 68i, 69i, 70i, 75i, 76i, 77i, 79i, 80–82i,
80i
ATLAS, hymn: O; notes: O.28–29, 7.2, 28.ATROPOS, see Fates
ATTIS, hymn: O; notes: O.39, 27i, 39i, 42i, 56i
Adamna, note: 39i
Adonis, note: 39i
Dionysos, note: 39i

Korybas, note: 39i
Osiris, note: 39i
Papas, note: 39i
AULIS, note: 36I
BABYLON, notes: 6.2, 56i, 83i
BACCHAE/BACCHANTES (54), notes: 1.3, 8i, 14.3, 27.11, 65.Bassarids, notes: 45i, 45.Thyiads, notes: 46i, 52i, 53i
BASSAREUS/BASSAROS (52), see Dionysos
BASSARIDS, see Bacchae/Bacchantes
BAUBO, notes: 41.4, 41.5–7, 42i, 42.4; see also Iambe
BEGINNING, hymn: O; notes: O.41, 15.BELLEROPHON, note: 32.BENDIS, see Artemis
BIA, note: 33i
BOIOTIA, note: 32.BOREAS (80), notes: 5.6, 78i, 81.6, 82i
BOUPALOS, note: 72i
BRANKHOS, note: 34.BRASIAI (Lakonia), note: 74i
BRAURON, note: 36i
BRONTES, see Kyklopes
BYBLOS, note: 56i
CENTAURS, note: 21i
CHAROS, note: 87i
CHLOE, note: 11.CLOUDS (21), notes: 16i, 22i, 22.7, 82.CONCORD, note: O.DAIMON (73), hymn: O; notes: 2i, 14.8–9, 20i, 68i; see also Zeus
DANTE, note: 87.DAPHNE, note: 34i
DAPHNIS, note: 11.DARKNESS, note: 69i

DAWN (78), notes: 7.3, 9i, 56.4, 69i, 71.1, 77i, 80–82i
DAY, hymn: O; notes: O.18, O.24, 3i, 3.8–11, 5i, 78.4–DEATH (87), hymn: 85; notes: 2i, 3i, 12.16, 83.3, 85i, 85.DECEPTION, notes: 3.2, 55i
DEIANIRA, notes: 12i, 25.4–DEIO, note: 14i
DELOS, hymns: 34, 35; notes: 2i, 34i, 35.5, 63i, 66i
DELPHI, hymns: O, 34; notes: 17i, 26i, 28i, 34i, 34.1, 34.16–23, 40i, 46i, 51i, 52.11, 53i,
76i, 79i, 79.7–10, 84i, 86i
Pytho, note: 34.DEMETER (40), hymns: O, 18, 23, 29; notes: O.25, 1.3, 1.4, 3i, 6.4, 8i, 8.1, 9.3, 10.1, 14i,
15i, 17i, 23.5–7, 27i, 29i, 29.1, 29.9–11, 30.2, 31i, 39i, 39.8, 41.1, 41.8, 42i, 42.4, 43i,
51.15–16, 58.5–7, 60i, 61i, 69i, 70.2–3, 73.4, 74i, 76.8–10, 81i, 84i, 87.9; see also
Kybele
Antaia, notes: 40i, 41i
Chthonia, note: 40.Deo, hymns: 29, 39, 40, 51, 65; notes: 39i, 40.1, 40.14, 51.15–Eleusinian, notes: 14i, 15.10–11, 26i, 32i, 67.Erinys, note: 69i
Rhea, note: 40i
Thesmophoria, note: O.DEMODOKOS, notes: 65.7, 66i, 76i
DEMOPHOÖN, notes: 40.2, 41i, 41.4, 41.8, 74i
DEO, see Demeter
DERVENI PAPYRUS, notes: 14i, 15.3–5, 16i, 40.1, 59.11–14, 66.4–5, 69i, 69.15, 70i, 83i, 84i
DIAGORAS OF MELOS, note: 38i
DIDYMA, note: 34.DIGENES, note: 87i
DIKE (62), hymns: O, 10, 43, 69; notes: 8.1, 10.14–16, 15i, 43i, 60i, 61i, 61.2, 63i, 63.14–
15, 64i, 69.9, 69.15, 69.16, 70.4–5; see also Seasons
DIOMEDES, notes: O.19, 32i, 32.12, 60i, 65i
DIONE, hymn: O; notes: O.19, 4i, 55i
DIONYSOS (30, 45), hymns: O, 42, 44, 48, 53, 57, 74, 75; notes: O.28–29, 1.3, 3i, 4.4, 6i,
6.1, 6.9, 8i, 9.4, 10.26, 11i, 11.5, 11.9, 11.10–12, 12i, 13i, 14i, 14.6, 14.8, 14.8–9, 15i,
16i, 19i, 24.9–11, 27.11, 27.13, 28i, 29i, 29.7–8, 29.12–14, 31i, 32i, 32.1, 32.4–5,
32.6, 32.10, 34i, 34.1, 34.7, 36.2, 37i, 38i, 39i, 39.2, 39.8, 40i, 40.10, 41.8, 42i, 42.6,

42.9–10, 42.10, 43i, 44i, 44.3, 44.6–9, 48i, 49i, 51i, 51.3, 51.15–16, 54i, 54.1, 54.10,
55i, 56i, 56.8–9, 57i, 57.3–5, 58.3, 66i, 66.12, 67.1, 67.5, 68.1, 71.4–5, 71.11, 72.4,
74i, 75i, 75.1, 83.8, 87.3–4, 87.9; see also Eubouleus, Iacchos
Attis, note: 39i
Bacchos, hymns: 24, 34, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 79; notes: 34.7,
36.2, 40i, 46.2–3, 50.2, 51.Bassareus/Bassaros (52), hymn: 45; notes: 45i, 50.Bromios, hymn: 40; notes: 6i, 29.7–8, 30.1, 40.10, 52.Eiraphiotes, hymn: 48; notes: 48.3, 50.Erikepaios, hymn: 52; notes: 6i, 6.3, 6.4, 50.God of Annual Feasts (53), note: 50.God of Triennial Feasts (52), hymn: 45; notes: 30.5, 45i, 50.Iacchos, notes: 42.4, 49.2, 50.Kadmeios, note: 47i
Lenaios (50), hymn: 52; notes: 52.2, 54.Liber, note: 47.Liknites (46), hymn: 52; notes: 47i, 50.2, 52.2, 53i
Lyaios, hymn: 65; note: 65.Lysios (50), hymn: 52; notes: 52.2, 54.Melpomenos, note: 77i
Omestes, note: 30.Osiris, note: 42i
Paian, hymn: Perikionios (47), note: 50.Priapos, note: 6.Sabos, note: 50.Zagreus, note: 44i
DIOSKOUROI, hymn: 38; notes: O.20–22, 12i, 17.9–10, 31i, 38i, 74i, 75.6–8, 80–82i
Saviors, hymn: O
DORIS, see Okeanids
DREAM (86), note: 71.DREAMS, notes: 3i, 85i
Ikelos, note: 86i
Morpheus, note: 86i
Phantasos, note: 86i

Phobetor, note: 86i
DRYADS, see Nymphs
DRYOPS, note: 11i
DYSAULES, hymn: 41; notes: 41.5–7, 42i
EARTH (26), hymns: O, 15, 21, 37, 79, 82; notes: O.3–5, 3i, 4i, 6.2, 8i, 10.1, 11.9, 13i,
13.6, 14i, 14.1, 15i, 15.7, 16i, 17i, 18.2, 23i, 27i, 27.2, 27.9, 32i, 34.3, 37i, 40i, 41.1–
2, 58i, 58.5–7, 59i, 67.5, 69i, 76i, 77i, 78.11–12, 79i, 79.3–6, 83i, 84i, 86i
ECHO, hymn: 11; note: 11.EGYPT, hymns: 42, 55; notes: 6.2, 8.3, 11i, 25.4–8, 39i, 40.16, 46.2–3, 55.15–28, 76i, 83i
EIDOTHEA, note: 25.4–EILEITHYIA, hymn: O; notes: 10.19, 36i, 36.8, 55.8, 58i; see also Artemis, Hekate Prothyraia
(2)
EIRENE, see Seasons
EKHIDNA, note: 70.ELEA, notes: 60i, 74i
ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES, notes: Oi, 12i, 15i, 18i, 18.12–15, 18.16, 39i, 40i, 40.11, 41.4, 42.4, 45.5,
50i
ELEUSIS, hymns: 18, 40, 41, 42; notes: 18.12–15, 40i, 40.10, 41i, 41.4, 41.5–7, 41.8, 42i,
42.4, 52i, 74i, 76.8–10, 81i
ELIS, notes: 12i, 30.3–4, 54i, 59.11–ELYSIAN FIELDS, notes: 11i, 13i, 25.4–8, 81i
EMATHION, note: 78i
EMPEDOKLES, notes: 5.4, 8i, 59.3–4, 66.4–END, hymn: O; notes: O.41, 15.ENDYMION, note: 9i
ENKELADOS, see Giants
ENYALIOS, see Ares
ENYO, note: 65i
EPHESOS, notes: 31i, 35.5, 36i
EPIDAUROS, notes: 63i, 67i
EPIDAUROS LIMERA, note: 74i
EPIMELIADS, see Nymphs
EPIROS, note: 11i
EREBOS, notes: O.24, 3i, 5i, 6.1, 13.1, 58.5–ERIKEPAIOS, hymns: 6, 52; see also Dionysos, Protogonos

ERIKHTHONIOS, note: 32i
ERINYES (69), hymn: 29; notes: 1.3, 8.1, 26.2, 29.6, 30i, 30.1, 39i, 40i, 59i, 59.3–4, 59.16,
61i, 62i, 62.1, 70i, 70.2–3, 70.4–5, 70.6–7, 70.8, 70.9, 70.10, 71i, 71.2, 77i
Curses, note: 69i
of Laios and Oedipus, note: 69i
EROS (58), hymn: 56; notes: 2i, 6i, 6.1, 6.2, 6.5–7, 6.9, 9.4, 10.14–16, 51i, 55i, 55.4–7,
55.9, 56.8–9, 60i, 68i, 69i, 81i; see also Protogonos
EROTES, hymn: 55; note: 55.ETHER (5), hymns: 66, 80; notes: O.24, 3i, 4i, 6i, 6.1, 8i, 10.27, 11i, 11.2–3, 13.1, 55.3,
58i
ETHIOPIANS, notes: 61i, 78i
ETNA, note: 23.5–ETRURIA, note: 39i
EUBOULEUS/EUBOULOS, hymns: 41, 42, 72; notes: 6.4, 6.5–7, 18.12, 30.6, 41.5–7, 41.Adonis, hymn: 56; notes: 30.6, 56i, 72.Dionysos, hymns: 29, 30, 52; notes: 6i, 29.7–8, 30.6, 41.8, 50.2, 52.6, 56i, 58.3, 72.Hades, hymn: 18, note: 41.Protogonos, notes: 6i, 6.5–7, 30.6, 41.8, 52.6, 72.Sun, note: 8i
Zeus, notes: 30.6, 41.8, 72.EUCHENOR, note: 59i
EUDEMOS OF RHODES, note: 81i
EUMAIOS, note: 51.EUMENIDES (70), notes: 30i, 34i, 59i, 61i, 69i, 69.16, 71i
EUMOLPIDS, note: Oi
EUMOLPOS, notes: Oi, 41i
EUNOMIA, see Seasons
EUPHROSYNE, see Graces
EURIPIDES, notes: 44.6–9, 61.5; see also Index Locorum
EUROS, note: 80–82i
EURYDIKE, notes: 11.9, 18.16, 25.4–8, 58.5–7, 87.EURYNOME, see Okeanids
EURYSTHEUS, note: 2i
FAITH, hymn: O; note: O.FATE, hymn: 59; notes: O.28–29, 59i, 59.3–4, 59.11–14, 61i, 61.8, 69.15, 69.16, 72i

FATES (59), hymn: 43; notes: 1i, 2i, 4i, 7.3, 8.9, 43i, 55.3, 60i, 61i, 62i, 62.1, 69i, 69.16,
70.4–5, 72i, 79i
Lakhesis, note: 61i
Tyche, note: 72i
FAUST, note: 87.FEAR, note: 65i
FESTUS, note: 8.FORETHOUGHT, note: 72i
GADEIRA, note: O.GALANTHIS, note: 2i
GALATEA, see Nymphs
GALLI, note: 27i
GANYMEDE, notes: O.13, 58.GENESIS, note: 5i; see also Index Locorum
GERYON, notes: 12.3, 12.16, 83.GIANTS, notes: 4i, 26.2, 69i
Enkelados, note: 32.Gorgo, hymn: 32; notes: 32.8, 32.Pallas, note: 33.Phlegraian Giants, hymn: 32; note: 32.GIGANTOMACHY, notes: 30.4, 32i, 32.1, 32.8, 32.12, 45.5, 76i
GLAUKOS, note: 74i
GOD OF ANNUAL FEASTS (53), see Dionysos
GOD OF TRIENNIAL FEASTS (52), see Dionysos
GORGO, see Giants
GORGONS, note: 83.Medousa, notes: 17i, 32.GRACES (60), hymns: O, 10, 43; notes: O.25, 9.10, 10i, 30.3–4, 43i, 55i, 55.9, 63i, 68.Aglaia, note: 66i
Kharis, note: 66i
GRAIAI, see Enyo
GREATER DIONYSIA, notes: 50i, 54i
GURÔB PAPYRUS, notes: 6.4, 31i, 32.HADES, hymn: 68; notes: O.12, 1.4, 8i, 8.1, 9.3, 13.4, 17i, 17.7, 29i, 29.6, 29.12–14, 40i,

41i, 51.4, 58.5–7, 68.6, 70.2–3, 71.2, 71.4–5, 72i, 73i, 73.2, 73.4, 87i, 87.9; see also
Eubouleus
Aidoneus, note: 18.Chthonic Zeus, hymns: 18, 41, 70;
notes: 18.3, 40.8–9, 57i, 63.15, 70.2–Plouton (18), hymns: 29, 71; notes: 15i, 26i, 29.4, 43i, 73i
HADES (place), hymns: 3, 18, 29, 41, 69; notes: 18.9, 18.10, 29.4, 29.19, 70.6, 71.2, 77i,
78.4–5, 83.3, 85.8, 86i, 87.9, 87.HAEMONIANS, note: 39i; see also Thessaly
HAGNE, hymn: 76; note: 76.8–HALIARTOS, note: 29.HALIEIA, note: 8i
HAMADRYADS, see Nymphs
HAPPENSTANCE, note: 3i
HARMONIA, notes: 43i, 55i, 65i
HARPIES, note: 81i
Podarge, note: 81i
HEBE, hymn: O; notes: OI, O.13, 2I, 12I, 43I, 67.HEKATE (1), notes: 2i, 8.1, 9i, 9.1–2, 9.3, 9.4, 10i, 10.1, 10.14–16, 11i, 29i, 29.1, 29.15–
16, 36i, 36.3, 36.6, 40.2, 40.16, 41i, 71i, 71.1, 71.11, 72.2, 74i; see also Artemis,
Eileithyia, Moon
Antaia, note: 41.Prothyraia (2)
HEKTOR, notes: 9.1–2, 86i
HELEN, notes: Oi, 38i, 55i, 61i
HELIKON, notes: O.19, 76i, 76.HELIOPOLIS, note: 8.HEPHAISTOS (66), hymn: O; notes: O.11, 5.2, 5.4, 8.1, 13.1, 16i, 19i, 24.9–11, 32i, 34.2,
46.7, 54i, 55i, 65.7, 72i, 83.3, 83.HERA (16), hymn: O; notes: O.13, 2i, 3i, 12i, 14i, 14.8, 14.8–9, 15i, 21i, 26i, 27i, 27.13,
32.1, 36i, 37i, 37.3, 38.3, 40.16, 43i, 44i, 52.2–3, 55i, 65i, 66i, 66.12, 74i, 83.8, 85i;
see also Kybele
HERAKLEITOS, notes: 8.16, 64i, 66.4–5, 69.16; see also Index Locorum
HERAKLES (12), hymn: O; notes: O.13, 2i, 7i, 8.3, 8.13, 10i, 11i, 12i, 13i, 16i, 25.4–8, 27.13,
32i, 34.1, 51i, 65i, 66i, 67.1, 73.2, 78i, 83.3, 87i, 87.9, 87.Paion, hymn: 12; note: 12.
Pankrates, note: 12.Titan, hymn: 12; note: 12.HERMAPHRODITOS, notes: 51i, 51.HERMES (28), hymn: O; notes: 1i, 7.2, 9.4, 11i, 34i, 34.24–25, 41.5–7, 43i, 44i, 51i, 51.3,
51.12, 54.1, 55i, 56i, 58i, 65i, 73i, 74i, 76.8–10, 77i, 84i, 87.Argeiphontes, hymn: 28; note: 28.Chthonic Hermes (57), notes: 28i, 28.1, 60i, 71.2, 73i
lord of Korykos, hymn: 28; note: 28.HERMIAS, note: 63i
HERMIONE, notes: 40.14, 61i
HESIOD, notes: 3i, 4i, 34.11–15; see also Index Locorum
HESPERIDES, notes: 12i, 12.16, 25.4–8, 83.HESTIA (84), hymn: 27; notes: Oi, 4.4, 5.1, 14i, 15i, 16i, 27i, 27.8, 27.9, 40.16, 55i, 66.8,
79i
HIEROKAISAREIA (LYDIA), note: 6.HIERONYMOS, notes: 6i, 6.1, 6.2, 11i, 12.HIPPOCRATICS, notes: 67.4, 68i
HIPTA (49), hymn: 48; notes: 14.8–9, 27i, 30.8, 42.6, 44i, 46i, 46.2–3, 48i
HITTITES, notes: O.28–29, 6.HOMER, notes: 3i, 7i; see also Index Locorum
HOPE, note: O.HORUS, notes: 34.2, 34.HUNDRED-HANDERS, notes: 4i, 13i, 26i, 37i, 37.3, 59i
HYAKINTHOS, note: 81i
HYBRIS, note: 34.24–HYDRA, note: 12.HYGEIA/HYGIEIA (68), hymn: 67; notes: 10.1, 14.8–9, 15.10–11, 40.18–20, 55.9, 58i, 69i, 73i
HYLAS, note: 51i
HYMENAIOS, note: 67i
HYPERBOREANS, notes: 2i, 46i
HYPERION, hymn: 8; notes: 8.2, 9i, 10i, 78i, 78.3; see also Sun
IACCHOS, hymns: 42, 49; notes: 40.10, 42i, 42.6, 50i
Dionysos, notes: 42.4, 49.2, 50.IAMBE, note: 41.4; see also Baubo

IAMBLICHUS, note: 12.3; see also Index Locorum
IASION, notes: 40.16, 41.IDA, hymn: 49; notes: 5i, 15i, 31i, 49i
IDAIAN DACTYLS, hymn: O; notes: O.20–22, 12i, 66i
IKARIOS, note: 50i
ILISSOS, note: 80i
INAKHOS, note: 32i
INO, see Leukothea
IO, notes: 16i, 28.IPHIGENEIA, note: 36i
IRIS, notes: 2i, 58.5–7, 81i
ISHTAR, note: 56i
ISIS, hymn: 42; notes: 42i, 42.9–10, 55.15–28, 63i, 73i, 73.4; see also Tyche
ISLE(S) OF THE BLEST, notes: 13i, 59.3–4, 80.3–4, 83.ISTHMIAN GAMES, notes: 52i, 75i
ITHAKA, notes: 32i, 51i
IXION, note: 21i
JASON, notes: 14.9–10, 32.8, 80i
JUPITER (planet), note: 7.JUSTICE (63), hymns: O, 59; notes: O.14, 59i, 60i, 61i, 62i, 64i; see also Tyche
KABEIROI, hymn: O; notes: O.20–22, 38.20–21, 39i, 66i
KADMOS, hymns: 44, 47, 74; notes: 44i, 47i, 47.5, 52i, 65i, 74i
KALAIS, note: 80i
KALAUREA, note: 17i
KALKHAS, note: 36i
KALLIMAKHOS, note: 1.4; see also Index Locorum
KALLISTO, note: 11i
KALYDONIAN BOAR, note: Oi
KARIANS, note: 1i
KARPO, see Seasons
KASSANDRA, note: 59.6–KASTOR, see Dioskouroi
KEKROPS, note: 32i
KELEOS, note: 41.5–
KEPHALOS, notes: 56.4, 78i
KERBEROS, note: 12.KHAOS, notes: 3i, 4i, 5i, 6.1, 13.1, 26i, 55.3, 58i
KHARIS, see Graces
KHARON, notes: 29.19, 57.6, 87i
KHEIRON, notes: 34.24–25, 54.1, 67i, 67.KHRYSIPPOS, notes: 15i, 59.11–14, 59.18, 64i, 66.9; see also Index Locorum
KILIKIA, note: 28.KINYRAS, notes: 56i, 56.KLEANTHES, notes: 8.9, 15i, 29.15–16, 58.5–7; see also Index Locorum
KLEITOS, note: 78i
KLEOBOULOS, note: 58.KLOTHO, see Fates
KLYTEMNESTRA, notes: Oi, 38i
KNOSSOS, notes: 2i, 69i, 80–82i
KOIOS, hymn: 35; notes: 34i, 35i
KOKYTOS, hymns: 57, 71; notes: 18.2, 57.1, 71.KOLONOS, note: 69i
KORINTH, notes: 17i, 75i
KORONIS, note: 67i
KORYBANTES, hymns: O, 38; notes: O.20–22, 11i, 14.3, 27i, 27.13, 31i, 32.6, 39i, 71.KORYBAS (39), notes: 30.4, 32i, 40.14, 46i, 71.Attis, note: 39i
Koures, hymn: 39; note: 39i
KORYKIAN CAVE, note: 51i
KOS, notes: 31i, 67i
KOURETES (31, 38), hymn: O; notes: O.20–22, 4.4, 5.6, 8.10, 10.14–16, 14.3, 16.3, 17.9–10,
26i, 27i, 32i, 32.4–5, 32.6, 37i, 39i, 39.2, 40.8–9, 45.7, 51i, 74i, 75.6–8, 76.7, 80–82i
KRATOS, note: 33i
KRETE, notes: 2i, 12i, 15i, 18.16, 31i, 34.16–23, 36.3, 38i, 38.Kydonia, hymn: 36; note: 36.Mount Dikte, note: 36.KRITO, note: 77i
KROISOS, notes: 34.7, 65.8–KRONIA, note: 13i

KRONOS (13), hymns: O, 4, 14, 27, 48, 84; notes: O.18, 4i, 10.26, 12i, 12.1, 14i, 14.8, 14.8–
9, 15i, 15.3–5, 16i, 17i, 18i, 22.8, 26i, 32i, 40i, 55i, 59i, 69i, 71.3, 73.2, 76i, 83.8, 84i,
85.1–Titan, hymn: 13; note: 13i
KYBELE, notes: 10.14–16, 11i 14i, 14.2, 14.3, 14.8–9, 15i, 31i, 32i, 32.4–5, 32.6, 36i, 38i,
38.1–2, 39i, 40i, 40.15, 41i, 41.1, 41.1–2, 46i, 48i, 49i, 56i, 60i, 71.11; see also
Demeter, Earth, Hera, Rhea
Meter, notes: 14i, 27i, 42i
Mother of the Gods (27), hymns: O, 42; notes: 11i, 14i, 14.9–10, 26i, 49i, 55.4–7,
84i
KYDONIA, see Krete
KYKLOPES, notes: 4i, 13i, 19i, 26i, 37i, 59i, 66i; see also Polyphemos
Arges, note: 19i
Brontes, note: 19i
Steropes, note: 19i
KYKNOS (bandit), notes: 12i, 32i, 65i
KYME, note: 34.KYPROS, hymns: 42, 55; notes: 55i, 55.15–28, 56i, 57.KYPSELOS, notes: 62.9, 85i
KYROS, note: 65.8–KYTHERA, note: 55i
LAKE PALODES, note: 11i
LAKE TRITON, note: 32.LAKHESIS, see Fates
LAKONIA, note: 74i
LAMPSAKOS, note: 6.LEARKHOS, note: 74i
LEDA, notes: 38i, 61i
LEMNOS, notes: O.20–22, 66i
LENAIA, notes: 42.4, 50i
LENAIOS (50), see Dionysos
LESBOS, note: 16i
LETO (35), hymn: O; notes: O.19, 1i, 2i, 34i, 34.1, 36.LEUKOTHEA (74), hymn: O; notes: 14.8–9, 17.9–10, 24.9–11, 73i, 75i, 75.6–of Segeira, note: 74i

Ino, hymn: O; notes: 16i, 27.13, 30.2, 36.3, 44i, 46.2–3, 75i, 75.LIBYA, note: 32.LIKNITES (46), see Dionysos
LINOS, note: 12I
LIPS, note: 80–82I
LOKI, notes: 28i, 66I
LOUKILLIOS, note: 74I
LYCEUM, note: 76I
LYDIANS, hymn: 49; note: 49I
LYKIA, note: 85I
LYKOURGOS, notes: 24.9–11, 45.5, 83.LYSIOS (50), see Dionysos
MACEDONIA, notes: 54.10, 76i, 76.MACROBIUS, notes: 6.5–7, 6.MAGI, note: 80–82i
MAIA, hymn: 28; notes: 7.2, 28.1, 57.3–MAKHAON, note: 67i
MAKRIS, see Nymphs
MALALAS, note: 6.MARATHON, note: 11i
MARS (planet), note: 7.MARSYAS, see Satyrs
MEDEIA, notes: 2i, 80–82i
MEDOUSA, see Gorgons
MEGAIRA, see Erinyes
MEGARA (city), notes: 3i, 9i, 74i
MEGARA (wife of Herakles), note: 27.MELIKERTES, see Palaimon
MELINOE (71), notes: 1.2, 9i, 29i, 29.6, 39i, 57.1, 69i, 72.2, 86.18; see also Moon
MEMNON, note: 78i
MEMPHIS, hymn: 34; note: 34.MEN (god), hymn: O; notes: O.39, 9.MENE, note: 9.1–MENELAOS, notes: 13i, 25.4–8, 61i

MERCURY (planet), note: 7.MESSENE, note: 76.8–METER, see Kybele
METHANA, note: 80–82i
METIS, notes: 6i, 6.10, 15.3–5, 26i, 32i, 32.10, 79i; see also Protogonos
MIDAS, notes: 54i, 54.MILETOS, note: 34.MIMNERMOS, note: 76i; see also Index Locorum
MINOS, notes: 18.16, 36.3, 87.MINYADS, notes: 45.3, 45.MISE (42), notes: 6.1, 7.12–13, 9.4, 30.2, 49.2, 50.Kore, note: 42i
Nisa, note: 42i
MITHRAISM, note: 7I
MNEMOSYNE (77), hymns: O, 76; notes: 69i, 76i, 76.7, 76.8–10, 76.12, 78i
Lake of, notes: 77i, 85.MODENA, notes: 6i, 6.MONTH, note: O.MOON (9), hymn: O; notes: 1i, 1.2, 2i, 3.4, 5i, 6i, 7i, 7.8, 8i, 8.1, 8.13, 10i, 10.1, 10.18,
10.21–24, 29i, 29.9–11, 36i, 36.3, 36.6, 55.15–28, 59.3–4, 62i, 69.1, 69.9, 69.16,
70.6–7, 70.10, 71i, 72.2, 74i, 77i, 78i; see also Melinoe
Pasiphae, note: 74i
Selene, hymn: 9; note: 72.MOPSOS, note: 14.9–MORNING STAR, note: 78i
MOTHER OF THE GODS, see Kybele
MOUNT PANGAION, note: 8i
MOUSAIOS, hymn: O; notes: Oi, 24.9–11, 40i, 41i, 54.10, 76i, 80i; see also Index Locorum
MOUSEIA, note: 76i
MOUSEION, note: 76i
MUSES (76), hymns: O, 34, 77; notes: Oi, O.19, 11.9, 34i, 34.6, 40.8–9, 60i, 65.5, 69i,
71.1, 77i, 85i, 85.8, 86i
Kalliope, hymn: 24; note: 24.9–Melpomene, note: 77i
Mneiai, note: 77i

Mneme, note: 77i
MYRRH, note: 56i
NAASSENES, note: 39i
NAIADS, see Nymphs
NAMMU, note: 83i
NARCISSUS, note: 11.NECESSITY, hymns: 3, 55, 69, 70; notes: 3.8–11, 4.6, 8.9, 55.3, 58i, 59i, 59.18, 61i, 67.4,
69.15, 69.16, 70.4–5, 79i
NELEUS, note: 17i
NEMEAN GAMES, notes: 2i, 9i, 12i, 12.15, 38i, 52i
NEMEAN LION, notes: 9i, 12i, 12.NEMESIS (61), notes: O.25, 8.1, 55.3, 59i, 59.18, 60i, 62.1, 62.2, 64i, 69i, 69.16, 72i, 79i;
see also Tyche
NEOPTOLEMOS, note: 61i
NEPHELE, note: 74i
NEREIDS (24), notes: 1.3, 14.8–9, 23i, 45.7, 51i, 51.1, 75.1, 75.6–8, 76.7; see also Nymphs,
Okeanids
Thetis, notes: 24i, 24.9–11, 25.4–8, 66i, 79i, 83.NEREUS (23), hymn: 24; notes: 14.8–9, 15.10–11, 24i, 25i, 25.4–8, 74i, 75.6–8; see also
Old Man of the Sea, Proteus
NESTOR, note: 17i
NEW COMEDY, note: 72i
NIGHT (3), hymns: O, 7, 59; notes: O.18, 1.4, 4i, 4.1, 4.3, 4.5, 5i, 6i, 6.3, 7.3, 7.9, 10.1,
10.18, 10.26, 14.1, 14.8–9, 58.5–7, 59i, 59.3–4, 61i, 69i, 69.16, 71.8–9, 78i, 78.4–5,
79i, 85i, 85.NIKANDROS, note: 2i
NIKE (33), hymn: O; notes: 7.12–13, 32.13, 38i, 61i
NIOBE, note: 35i
NISA, see Mise
NOMOS (64), notes: 10.14–16, 59i, 59.5–6, 60i, 62i, 63i
NOTOS (82), notes: 78i, 80–82i
NUN, note: 83i
NYMPHS (51), hymns: O, 46, 53, 55; notes: 1.3, 11i, 11.9, 22i, 24.9–11, 30i, 30.8, 36i,
42.10, 44i, 45.7, 46.2–3, 56i, 58.3, 66i, 70.6, 77i; see also Nereids, Okeanids
types

Ash Tree Nymphs, notes: 26.2, 51i
Dryads, note: 51i
Epimeliads, note: 51.Hamadryads, hymn: 51; notes: 7i, 51.Naiads, hymn: 54; notes: 27.11, 51i, 54.Oreads, notes: 31i, 51i
individuals
Galatea, note: 74i
Makris, note: 46.2–Oinoe, note: 11i
Persuasion, note: 55.Syrinx, note: 11.Tyro, note: 74i
NYSA, hymn: 46; notes: 46.2–3, 51.4, 51.15–16, 52.2–3, 57.3–OATH, note: 69.OBLIVION, hymn: 85; notes: 77i, 85.ÓÐIN, note: 15.3–ODYSSEUS, notes: 11i, 12i, 18.9, 19i, 23.5–7, 25.4–8, 28.10, 29i, 32i, 32.11, 51i, 51.12, 55i,
65.7, 71.4–5, 72i, 74i, 81.3–4, 83.3, 87.OGDOAD, notes: 11i, 83i
OINOE, see Nymphs
OKEANIDS, notes:  22i,  24.9–11,  30i,  51i,  51.1,  51.4,  51.15–16,  55.9;  see  also  Dione,
Nymphs, Persuasion, Styx, Tyche
Doris, notes: 24i, 24.9–Eurynome, notes: 22.8, 60i, 66i, 83i, 83.Telesto, note: 71.OKEANOS (83), hymns: O, 11, 22, 38, 51; notes: 3i, 4i, 6.3, 8.16, 10.21–24, 12.3, 22i, 22.7,
22.8, 24.9–11, 51.1, 60i, 69.4, 79i, 81i, 82.OLD MAN OF THE SEA, notes: 23i, 25i; see also Nereus, Proteus
OLEN, notes: 2i, 58i
OLYMPIA, notes: 12i, 15i, 16i, 19i, 32.12, 33i
OLYMPIAN GAMES, notes: 12i, 15i, 34.3, 75i
OLYMPIAS, note: 46.OLYMPOS, hymns: 14, 25, 38, 45, 55, 56, 59; notes: O.19, O.25, 2i, 11i, 12i, 14.9–10, 16i,
22.8, 39i, 43i, 44.6–9, 55.15–28, 59.3–4, 61i, 65i, 66i, 76.2, 83i, 83.
ONOMAKRITOS, note: 12i
OPHION, notes: 22.8, 83i
OREADS, see Nymphs
OREITHYIA, notes: 80i, 80.ORESTES, notes: 36i, 69i, 70.9, 75.6–ORION, note: 78i
ORPHEUS, hymn: O; notes: Oi, O.18, 1i, 2i, 3i, 4.5, 6.8, 8i, 8.9, 10i, 10.14–16, 11i, 11.9, 12i,
14i, 16i, 17i, 18.16, 22.8, 24.9–11, 25.4–8, 34i, 34.8, 40i, 40.1, 41i, 45i, 45.3, 45.5,
48i, 51.15–16, 54.10, 56i, 58.5–7, 59.3–4, 59.11–14, 59.end, 63i, 65.7, 66i, 67.4, 76i,
76.7, 76.8–10, 80.2, 83i, 84i, 87.9; see also Index Locorum
works
Enthronements of the Mother, note: 27i
Korybantic Rite, note: 27i
Lesser Krater, notes: 17i, 51.15–Lyre, note: 11i
Rhapsodies, notes: O.19, 3i, 4i, 6i, 6.1, 6.3, 10.26, 13.3, 15.3–5, 19.16–17, 21i,
34.8, 43i, 60i
Thuēpolikon, note: Oi
ORTHEIA, note: 36.ORTHRIA, note: 78i
ORTYGIA, hymn: 35; note: 35.OSIRIS, notes: 34.7, 42i; see also Attis
PAIAN/PAION, hymns: 8, 11, 12, 34, 52, 67; notes: 8.11, 8.12, 10i, 11.10–12, 12.3, 12.10, 34.1,
34.7, 34.24–25, 52.11, 67.1, 67.6; see also Apollon, Asklepios, Pan, Sun
PALAIKASTRO, notes: 15i, 31i, 45.PALAIMON/MELIKERTES (75), hymn: O; notes: 1.3, 14.8–9, 17.9–10, 73i, 74i
PALLADION, note: 32i
PALLAS, see Athene, Giants
PAN (11), hymns: O, 34, 51; notes: 6.3, 6.9, 8.11, 10i, 10.14–16, 12i, 12.6, 12.10, 15.3–5,
24.9–11, 25i, 27.8, 32.6, 34i, 34.1, 34.24–25, 45.7, 46.7, 51i, 51.3, 51.8, 55.8, 64.2–4,
65.7, 71.11; see also Zeus
Paian, hymn: 11; note: 11.10–PANATHENAIA, note: 32i
PANDORA, notes: O.25, 13.1, 23.5–7, 28.10, 43i, 55.9, 60i, 66i
PANIC, note: 65i

PANTIKAPAION, note: 74i
PAPAS, see Attis
PAPHLAGONIANS, note: 53i
PAPHOS, note: 57.PAPPOSILENOS, see Satyrs
PARIS, note: 55i
Judgment of, note: Oi
PARMENIDES, note: 8i
PARNASSOS, notes: 34.1, 46i, 51i
PAROS, note: 11i
PARTHENON, note: 33i
PASIPHAE, see Moon
PATROKLOS, notes: 80–82i, 86i
PEGASOS, notes: 17i, 32.PEIRITHOÖS, note: 12.PELEUS, notes: 25.4–8, 79i
PENELOPE, notes: 11i, 86i
PENTHEUS, notes: 14.6, 30.3–4, 45.5, 47.PEPROMENE, note: 59.PERGAMON, notes: O.25, 3i, 32.13, 42i, 76i
PERIKIONIOS (47), see Dionysos
PERSEPHONE (29), hymns: O, 24, 30, 41, 43, 44, 46, 53, 56, 57, 70, 71; notes: 1i, 1.4, 8i, 8.1,
9.3, 12.16, 13.6, 14i, 14.8–9, 15i, 17i, 18i, 18.2, 18.12–15, 18.16, 26.2, 27i, 28i, 30i,
30.2, 31i, 39.8, 40i, 40.16, 41i, 41.5–7, 41.8, 42i, 43i, 44i, 44.6–9, 46.2–3, 46.6–7,
48i, 50.5, 51.4, 52.5, 53i, 56i, 56.8–9, 57i, 57.3–5, 57.7–8, 58.5–7, 59.3–4, 59.11–14,
60i, 61i, 68.1, 69i, 69.1, 69.16, 70.2–3, 71i, 71.2–3, 71.4–5, 71.10, 72i, 74i, 76.8–10,
81i, 87.Artemis, notes: 36.3, 40.Kore, notes: 18i, 29i, 31i, 75i
Praxidike, hymn: 29; note: 29.PERSES (Hesiod's brother), note: 63.14–PERSES (Titan), hymn: 1; note: 1.PERSEUS, notes: 17i, 32.PERSIANS, notes: 61i, 80–82i, 80i
PERSUASION, hymn: 55; notes: 10i, 55.9, 58i, 60i, 68i, 69i, 72i

PHAEDRA, note: 11i
PHAETHON, notes: 8i, 56.4, 66.4–PHANES, see Protogonos
PHAROS, note: 25.4–PHEIDIAS, notes: 33i, 61i
PHEREKYDES OF ATHENS, note: 87i
PHILIPPIDES, note: 11i
PHILOKHOROS, note: 77i
PHLIASIANS, note: 41.5–PHOIBE, notes: 34i, 35i, 79.3–PHOINIX (bird), note: 8.PHOINIX (man), notes: 56i, 56.PHORKYS, note: 4i
PHRYGIA, hymns: 27, 42, 48, 49; notes: 31i, 38i, 39i, 42.6, 48i, 49i, 53i, 54i
Mount Kybela, note: 14.PHYSIS (10), hymns: 4, 25; notes: 4.6, 6i, 6.3, 8.7, 9.4, 11i, 12i, 15.10–11, 25.2–3, 25.9,
26.1, 62.PHYSKOA, note: 16i
PIERIA, note: 76.PIETY, hymn: O; notes: O.14, 62i, 63i
PITYS, note: 11.PLATO, notes: 31.3, 73i, 76i; see also Index Locorum
PLEIADES, notes: 7.2, 7.12–PLOUTON (18), see Hades
PLOUTOS, notes: 18i, 40.16, 40.18–20, 41.8, 74i
PODALEIRIOS, note: 67i
PODARGE, see Harpies
POLEMON, note: 77i
POLYDEUKES, see Dioskouroi
POLYDOROS, note: 47i
POLYKRATES, note: 35.POLYPHEMOS, note: 28.PONTOS, notes: 22i, 23i, 26i, 83.4–5; see also Sea
POROS, note: O.POSEIDON (17), hymn: O; notes: O.3–5, 1i, 15i, 15.10–11, 16i, 18i, 23.5–7, 23.7–8, 24i, 26i,

32i, 32.1, 36i, 40i, 61i, 63.15, 66i, 69i, 74i, 75i, 79i, 79.3–6, 84i
Zeus, hymn: 63; note: 18.PRAXIDIKE, see Persephone
PRIAM, notes: 28i, 87.PRIAPOS, see Protogonos
PROCLUS, notes: O.18, 49i, 65i; see also Index Locorum
PRODIKOS, note: 12i
PROITIDS, note: 45.PROKRIS, note: 78i
PROMETHEUS, notes: 8.1, 12.10, 13.1, 13.7, 28i, 34.1, 40.8–9, 66i, 83.PRONOIA, hymn: O; note: O.PRONOMOS VASE, note: 54i
PROTEURYTHMOS, note: 75i
PROTEUS (25), notes: 10.14–16, 23i, 83i; see also Nereus, Old Man of the Sea
PROTHYRAIA (2), see Eileithyia, Hekate
PROTOGONEIA, note: 63i
PROTOGONOS (6), hymn: 14; notes: O.28–29, 3i, 4i, 4.1, 5i, 7.3, 8.7, 9.1–2, 9.4, 10.19, 10.26,
11i, 11.10–12, 14.1, 15.3–5, 15.7, 19.16–17, 21i, 25.2–3, 30.2, 30.3–4, 30.6, 32.10,
34i, 41.8, 50.2, 50.5, 52.6, 58i, 58.4, 63i, 72.4; see also Eubouleus, Sun
Antauges, hymn: 6; notes: 6i, 6.5–7, 8i
Bromios, notes: 6i, 52.Dionysos, note: 6.5–Erikepaios, hymn: 6, notes: 6i, 52.Eros, notes: 6i, 6.2, 6.5–7, 6.9, 58i, 58.4, 58.5–7, 81i
Metis, notes: 6i, 6.10, 32.Phanes, hymn: 6; notes: 6i, 6.2, 6.5–7, 6.8, 8i
Priapos, hymn: 6; notes: 6.9, 11.10–PROTONOE, note: 42i
PRUDENCE, note: O.PSYCHE, note: 55i
PTOLEMY, note: 4.3; see also Index Locorum
PYLADES, note: 75.6–PYLOS, note: 17i
PYTHAGORAS, notes: 4.3, 5.4, 8.9, 10i, 12i, 31i, 59.3–4, 63.7, 69.15, 69.16; see also Index
Locorum

PYTHIA, note: 79.PYTHO, see Delphi
PYTHON, hymns: 34, 79; notes: 34.3, 46i, 79.3–6, 79.RAGNARÖK, note: 66.4–RENENUTET, notes: 73i, 73.RHADAMANTHYS, notes: 18.16, 87.RHAMNOUS, notes: 61i, 79i
RHARION, note: 41i
RHEA (14), hymns: O, 13; notes: 10.1, 10.14–16, 13i, 13.1, 13.7, 14i, 14.1, 14.3, 14.8,
14.9–10, 15i, 15.10–11, 16i, 17i, 18i, 22.8, 26i, 27i, 27.12, 29i, 30.2, 31i, 32i, 39i, 40i,
41.1–2, 55.4–7, 69i, 71.11, 84i; see also Kybele
Antaia, note: 41.Demeter, note: 40i
RHENEIA, note: 35.RHESOS, note: 76i
RHODES, notes: 8i, 8.19, 9i
RITES, note: 3i
ROME, notes: 29i, 31.1–4, 47.5, 76i, 84i, 84.SABAZIOS (48), notes: 14.8–9, 46i, 46.2–3, 49i
Sabos, hymn: 49; notes: 42.6, 49.2, 50.SAKADAS, note: 34.SALII, note: 31.1–SAMOS, note: 35.SAMOTHRACE, hymn: 38; notes: O.20–22, 33i, 38i, 74i
SAMOTHRACIAN GODS, notes: O.20–22, 38i, 39i, 74i, 80–82i
SANDOKOS, note: 56.SAPPHO, note: 9i, 58.5–7; see also Index Locorum
SARPEDON, note: 85i
SATURN (planet), note: 7.SATURNALIA, note: 13i
SATYRS (54), notes: 12i, 14.3, 31i, 31.1–4, 47i, 50i, 51i, 52i, 66i; see also Silenos
Marsyas, note: 54i
Papposilenos, note: 54i
SCHERIA, note: 65.
SEA (22), note: 83i; see also Pontos, Tethys
SEASONS (43), hymns: O, 11, 26, 29; notes: 8.11, 15.10–11, 29.9, 40.18–20, 55i, 55.9, 59i,
60i, 62i, 63i, 79i; see also Dike
Eirene, hymn: 43; notes: 15.10–11, 40.2, 40.18–20, 43i
Eunomia, hymns: 43, 60; notes: 40.18–20, 43i, 60i, 72i
Karpo, note: 43i
Thallo, note: 43i
SELENE, see Moon
SEMELE (44), notes: 12i, 15i, 16i, 19i, 30.2, 42.10, 45.1, 46.6–7, 47i, 47.5, 50i, 51i, 52.2–
3, 52.5, 66.12, 67.1, 74i
Thyone, note: 44i
SEXUAL PASSION, note: 3.SHAME, notes: O.25, 61i
SHAY, note: 73i
SIKYON, note: 68i
SILENOS (54), notes: 10.14–16, 11i, 44i, 57.3–5, 67.5; see also Satyrs
SINTIES, note: 66i
SIRENS, note: 8.SISYPHOS, notes: 69.15, 75i, 87i, 87.8, 87.SKAMANDROS, notes: 9.1–2, 66i
SKY (4), hymns: 27, 37, 79; notes: 3i, 3.1, 5i, 5.1, 6.2, 7.9, 8i, 8.1, 8.7, 10.18, 10.21–24,
10.26, 13i, 13.3, 13.6, 14i, 14.1, 14.8–9, 15i, 15.7, 16i, 26i, 26.2, 32i, 37i, 51i, 55i,
58i, 59i, 69i, 70.6, 73.2, 76i, 76.8–10, 77i, 79i, 83i, 83.8, 84.SKYTHINOS OF TEOS, note: 8.SLEEP (85), notes: 3i, 3.6, 5i, 72i, 83i, 86i
SMYRNA (person), see Myrrh
SMYRNA (place), notes: 61i, 72i
SOKONOPIS, notes: 73i, 73.SOKRATES, notes: 8.16, 18.16, 21i, 54.10, 67i, 73i, 84i, 87.3–SOPHOKLES, note: 67i; see also Index Locorum
SPARTA, notes: 11i, 31i, 34i, 34.16–23, 36.8, 38i, 61i, 69i, 73.4, 78i, 80–82i
SPRING OF FORGETFULNESS, notes: 77i, 85.STARS (7), hymn: O; notes: 5i, 6i, 9i, 10.21–24, 33i, 42.11, 58.STEROPES, see Kyklopes
STOICISM, 5.2, 5.4, 8.16, 10i, 12i, 21i, 25.2–3, 32.9, 59.3–4, 64i, 66.4–5, 66.6–7, 66.9; see

also Kleanthes, Khrysippos, Zeno, and Index Locorum
STRATONICEA, note: 73.STRIFE, notes: Oi, 69.4, 76.STYX, hymns: O, 69; notes: 29.1, 33i, 69.4, 71.2, 83.3, 83.SUMERIANS, notes: 6.2, 83i
SUN (8), hymn: O; notes: 4.4, 4.5, 5i, 6i, 6.5–7, 6.8, 7i, 7.8, 9i, 9.3, 9.4, 9.5, 9.7, 10i,
10.18, 10.27, 11i, 11.10–12, 12i, 12.3, 12.10, 15i, 24.9–11, 34i, 34.1, 34.2, 34.3, 34.7,
34.8, 34.11–15, 34.16–23, 34.24–25, 41i, 56.4, 58.2, 62.1, 63i, 66i, 66.4–5, 74i, 77i,
78i, 78.3, 80.2; see also Eubouleus, Hyperion, Protogonos
Antauges, note: 8i
Dionysos, note: 8i
Hades, note: 8i
Paian, hymn: 8, note: 8.Phanes, note: 8i
Titan, hymns: 8, 78; notes: 12i, 12.3, 34.3, 78.Zeus, note: 8i
SYRIA, hymn: 55; notes: 55.15–28, 74i
SYRINX, see Nymphs
TAMMUZ, note: 56i
TANTALOS, note: 87.TARTAROS, hymns: 18, 56, 57, 58; notes: 3i, 13i, 16i, 18.2, 18.9, 26.2, 37.3, 57i, 58i, 58.5–7,
71.TEGEA, note: 34.24–TEIRESIAS, note: 52i
TEKMOR, note: O.TELESTO, see Okeanids
TELKHINES, note: 66i
TETHYS (22), hymn: O; notes: 17.9–10, 51.1, 71.1, 82.4, 83i, 83.4–5; see also Sea
THALAMAI, note: 74i
THALES, note: 83i
THALIA, see Graces
THALLO, see Seasons
THAMOUS, note: 11i
THAMYRIS, notes: 76i, 76.8–THASOS, note: 12i

THEBES, notes: O.20–22, 12i, 44i, 45.5, 47i, 59.11–14, 65i, 72i
THEIA, notes: 9i, 78i
THEIAS, note: 56i
THEMIS (79), hymns: O, 43; notes: 15i, 15.10–11, 43i, 52i, 59i, 59.11–14, 61i, 62i, 63i,
76.7, 86i
THEMISTO, note: 74i
THEODOSIUS, note: 40i
THERA, note: 69i
THESEUS, notes: 12.16, 17i, 75i, 87.THESMODOTEIRA, hymn: O; note: O.THESMOPHORIA, notes: 39i, 41.5–THESPIAI, notes: 58i, 76i
THESSALY, notes: 1.1, 67i
Haemonians, note: 39i
THETIS, see Nereids
THRACE, hymn: 80; notes: 11i, 36i, 65.7, 76i, 80–82i, 80.2, 81i
THUNDER, hymn: O; note: O.38; see also Zeus
THYIADS, see Bacchae/Bacchantes
THYONE, see Semele
TIAMAT, note: 83i
TIBERIUS, note: 11i
TIME, hymn: O; notes: O.18, O.28–29, 5i, 6i, 6.1, 6.5–7, 12i, 12.3, 13i, 13.1, 13.3, 55.3,
58.5–7, 77i, 81i
TISIPHONE, see Erinyes
TITANE, note: 80–82i
TITANS (37), notes: 4i, 4.4, 12.1, 13i, 13.1, 13.6, 14i, 15i, 16i, 19i, 26i, 29i, 30i, 30.2, 31i,
32i, 34i, 44i, 46i, 50i, 52.5, 66i, 66.9, 78.11–12, 83i, 87.3–4, 87.8, 87.12; see also
Apollon,  Artemis,  Atlas,  Dawn,  Dione,  Herakles,  Hyperion,  Koios,  Kronos,  Leto,
Mnemosyne, Okeanos, Perses, Phoibe, Phorkys, Prometheus, Rhea, Sun, Tethys, Theia,
Themis
Titanomachy, notes: 1.1, 13i, 18.2, 19i, 26.2, 76i, 79i, 83.TITHONOS, notes: 56.4, 78i
TITYOS, hymn: 34; note: 34.TMOLOS, hymns: 48, 49; note: 49i
TRAJAN, note: 74i
TRIPTOLEMOS, notes: 18.16, 40.8–9, 40.14, 41.5–
TRITON/TRITONS, hymn: 24; note: 24.TROIZEN, notes: 17i, 85i
TROJAN WAR, notes: 11i, 25.4–8, 28.10, 36i, 55i, 58.3, 61i, 65.5, 76i, 78i, 79i, 86i
TROPHONIOS, note: 77i
TUSCULUM, note: 1.TYCHE (72), notes: 2i, 7i, 14.8–9, 36i, 69.16, 73i, 73.2, 73.4; see also Fates
Artemis/Hekate/Moon, notes: 36.2, 72.Isis, note: 63i, 73i, 73.Justice, note: 63i
Nemesis, notes: 61i, 72i
Okeanid, note: 72i
TYNDAREUS, notes: 38i, 61i
TYPHON, notes: 15i, 16i, 18.2, 19i, 23.5–7, 26.2, 32.12, 37.3, 80–82i
TYRO, see Nymphs
ULLIKUMMIS, note: O.28–VALHALLA, note: 13i
VÉ, note: 15.3–VENUS (planet), note: 7.VESTA, notes: 84i, 84.VICE, note: 12i
VILI, note: 15.3–VIRTUE, note: 12i
WEALTH, note: 72i
XENOKRATES, note: 73i
XENOPHANES, note: 74i; see also Index Locorum
YEAR, hymn: O; note: O.YMIR, note: 15.3–ZAGREUS, see Dionysos
ZELOS, notes: 33i, 55i
ZEPHYROS (81), notes: 23.5–7, 58.5–7, 69.9, 78i, 80–82i, 80.ZETES, note: 80i

ZEUS (15), hymns: O, 5, 8, 11, 14, 16,, 28, 29, 30, 32, 35, 36, 41, 43, 44, 46, 50, 52, 59,
60, 62, 63, 70, 71, 73, 76, 77, 82; notes: O.3–5, O.13, O.20–22, O.28–29, O.41, 1i, 1.4,
2i, 3i, 4i, 4.2, 4.5, 5.1, 6i, 6.3, 7.3, 8i, 8.1, 8.9, 8.13, 8.16, 9.1–2, 9.4, 10i, 10.14–16,
10.26, 11i, 11.10–12, 12i, 13i, 13.3, 14i, 14.3, 14.8, 14.8–9, 16i, 17i, 17.7, 18i, 18.2,
18.16, 21i, 23.5–7, 26i, 26.2, 28i, 28.1, 29i, 30.2, 30.6, 31i, 32i, 32.1, 32.6, 33i, 34i,
34.24–25, 35.5, 37i, 37.3, 38i, 38.3, 39.8, 40i, 40.1, 40.16, 41.8, 43i, 44i, 44.6–9, 45.7,
46i, 47i, 48i, 48.3, 49i, 50.3, 51i, 51.3, 52.2–3, 52.5, 55i, 56i, 57.3–5, 58i, 59i, 59.11–
14, 60i, 61i, 61.4, 62i, 62.1, 62.2, 63i, 63.14–15, 63.15, 64i, 65i, 66i, 66.4–5, 66.9,
66.12, 67i, 67.1, 68i, 69i, 69.9, 69.16, 71.4–5, 72i, 72.4, 74i, 76i, 77i, 78i, 79i, 79.3–6,
80–82i, 83i, 83.8, 85i, 85.1–4, 86i, 87.12; see also Eubouleus, Hades, Poseidon
Astrapaios (20), notes: O.38, 15i, 58.2, 73.Daimon, hymn: 73; notes: 20i, 73i, 73.Kataibates, note: 19i
Katharsios, note: 15.8–Keraunios, note: 19i
Kronian, hymns: 15, 44, 71; note: 71.Ktesios, notes: 73i, 73.Meilikhios, notes: 73i, 73.2, 73.Moiragetes, note: 59.11–Pan, notes: 11i, 11.10–Plousios, note: 73.Soter, note: 73i
Thunder, notes: O.38, 20i
Thunderbolt (19), notes: O.38, 8.7, 15i, 15.10–11, 20i

INDEX LOCORUM
See also Index Nominum for general references to authors.
AELIAN (fragments)
19: O.AELIUS ARISTIDES, Orations
40.12: 12.46.40: 75i
47–52: 86i
AESCHYLUS
Agamemnon
104–257: 36i
1327–1330: 59.6–Bassarai or Bassarides: 8i, 45i
Eumenides: 69i
1–8: 79.3–292–294: 32.321–323: 69i
329–330: 70.334–339: 69.342–343: 70.490–565: 69.736–738: 32.903–967: 70i
1004ff.: 70.2–Libation Bearers
1048–1050: 69.Prometheus Bound: 83.88–92: 8.90: 10.201–218: 79i
209–210: 79i

436–506: 40.8–9, 66i
936: 61i
Suppliant Women
674–677: 2i
AESOP, Fables
18: 80.ALKAIOS (fragments)
34: 38i
129: 16i, 16.4, 30.327: 58.5–7, 81i
343: 51i
349: 66i
ALKMAN (fragments, PMGF)
1: 7.12–13, 36i, 78i
1.60–63: 78i
5 fr. 2 col. iii: O.46: 71.58: 58.64: 72i
67: 76i
89.3–5: 78.6–10, 78.11–ANAKREON (fragments, PMG)
356a: 45i
357: 58.358: 58.395: 57.398: 58.411b: 45i
ANAXAGORAS (fragments, Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983)
500: 9i
502: 9i
ANAXIMANDER (fragments, Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983)
129: 21i, 22.130: 21i
131: 21i

ANAXIMENES (fragments, Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983)
148: 8.149: 8.158: 21i
ANONYMOUS
Kypria
fragment 1: 79i
fragment 7: 61i
(drama)
Sisyphos: 61.(lyric, PMG)
858: 80–82i
871: 30.3–939.10–11: 24i
1019: 72i
ANTONINUS LIBERALIS
29: 2i
34: 56i
APOLLODOROS
1.1.2: O.19, 19i
1.1.4: 69.1.2.1: 17.7, 19i
1.3.1: O.19, 29.1.3.2: 34i
1.3.6: 32i
1.4.1: 34.24–25, 35.5, 36i
1.4.1–2: 34.1.4.4: 78i
1.6.1–2: 32.1.6.2: 30.1.6.3: 15i, 23.5–1.9.1: 74i
2.2.2: 45.2.4.2: 32.2.4.8–2.7.8: 12i
2.5.11: 25.4–3.4.3: 30.2, 44i, 46.2–3, 57.3–5, 74i. 75i

3.5.1: 14.8, 16i
3.5.3: 44i
3.10.3: 67i
3.10.7: 61i
3.13.3–4: 56i
3.13.5: 25.4–3.14.1–2: 32i
3.14.3: 56.3.14.6: 32i
3.14.7: 50i
epit. 1.20: 21i
APOLLONIOS OF RHODES, Argonautika
1.18–20: 32.1.211ff.: 80i
1.493–502: 10.14–1.495–512: 22.8, 83i
1.526–527: 32.1.1098–1099: 14.9–1.1141: 41.1.1207–1239: 51i
2.475–483: 51.3.1–166: 55i
3.111–130: 58.4.540: 46.2–4.1131–1140: 46.2–4.1490: 34.scholion 3.1–5c: 76.8–APULEIUS, Metamorphoses or The Golden Ass
4.28–6.24: 55i
11.2: 55.15–11.5: 55.15–ARATOS, Phainomena: 7i
1–18: 15i
14: 15.96–136: 62.
ARIPHRON (fragments, PMG)
813: 68i
ARISTIDES QUINTILIANUS
18.5–19.10: 34.16–ARISTOPHANES
Birds: 58i
685–704: 6.686: 13.695: 58.5–697: 58.5–870: 35.873–875: 48i
Clouds
263–274: 21i
271: 22.277: 22.367–411: 21i
Frogs: 44.6–340–353: 42.372–416: 42.1392: 87.Knights
551–558: 17i
Lysistrata
387–390: 48i
Peace
406–413: 8i
832–841: 7i
Wasps
9–10: 48i
Wealth: 67i
(fragments)
404: 8i
578: 48i
ARISTOTLE
De caelo
290b21–29: 8.
Metaphysics
983b27–984a3: 83i
1091b4–6: 3i
Rhetoric
1400b5–8: 74i
ARKHILOKHOS (fragments)
1: 76i
ARTEMIDOROS, Oneirokritika: 86i
ATHENAIOS
1.30b–c: 6.8.334b–d: 61i
14.616f–617a: 32.BACCHIC GOLD TABLETS: 30.4, 33i
(Graf/Johnston 2007)
1: 4i, 77i
2: 4i, 77i
3: 18.2, 29i, 41.4: 6i
5: 13.6, 20i, 29i, 41.8, 87.6: 13.6, 20i, 29i, 87.3–7: 13.6, 20i, 29i, 87.3–8: 4i, 29i, 77i
9: 4i, 29i, 41.10: 4i
11: 4i
12: 4i
13: 4i
14: 4i
15: 29i
16: 4i
17: 29i
18: 4i
25: 4i, 77i
26a, b: 29i, 50i
27: 18.
28: 40i
29: 4i
31: 29i
37: 29i
BACCHYLIDES
5.9: 59.end
13.124–132: 82i
17.97–129: 17.17.100–108: 24.2–fragment 1b: 1.Anth. Pal.: 6.53, 81i
BIBLE, GENESIS
18:20ff.: 66.4–BION, Lament for Adonis: 56i
CICERO
De natura deorum
3.15: 74i
3.89: 38i
De respublica
6.18: 7.CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA
Protrepticus
2.16.1: 29i
2.16.2: 48i
2.16.3: 39.2.17.1: 41.5–2.18.1: 32.2.19: 39i
2.20.2: 41.5–2.20.3–21.1: 41.Stromateis
5.8.48.1: 8.DEMETRIUS, On Style
169: 54i
DEMOSTHENES
18.259–260: 48i
DIODORUS SICULUS
1.13.5: 42i

1.22.7–23.8: 42i
3.63.4: 50i
4.3.2–3: 52i
4.4.1: 48i
4.4.3: 76.4.4.3–4: 54.4.5.4: 76.4.7.1: 76i
5.49: 39i
5.76.3: 41.DIOGENES LAERTIUS
2.9: 21i
8.48: 4.EPIDAURIAN HYMN TO THE MOTHER OF THE GODS: 27i
19–24: 14.9–EPIMENIDES (fragments, Bernabé 2004–2007)
33: 9i
46: 3i
51: 59i
EURIPIDES
Alkestis: 12.1–7: 34.24–252: 87i
837–860: 87i
963–972: 67.1140: 87i
Bacchae: 14.6, 45.5, 46.7, 50.5, 51.15–16, 52i, 52.7–1–42: 44i
58–59: 14.99–104: 30.3–120–134: 14.3, 54.133: 52i
135–167: 52i
147: 45.169–214: 52i
280–282: 50i

284–285: 50i
303–304: 30.443–450: 50i
576–603: 47.604–641: 47.714–768: 65.751–764: 30.918–924: 30.3–1017–1019: 6i
1017: 30.3–Helen
1301–1368: 27i
1338–1345: 60i
Herakleidai
900: O.28–Hippolytos
141–144: 11i
145–147: 36.447–451: 55.4–Ion
20–26: 32i
267–274: 32i
987–997: 32.1478: 32.Ino: 74i
Iphigeneia at Tauris: 36i
42–58: 86i
270–271: 75.6–1234–1283: 79.3–1259–1282: 86i
Kretans (fragment)
472: 31i
Kyklops: 54i
1–8: 54.3: 16i

606–607: 72i
Medeia
250–251: 2i
1172: 11i
Orestes
321: 70.Phoenician Women (scholium)
651: 47i
Rhesos: 76i
(fragments)
486: 63i
944: 27.1022: 69.HERAKLEITOS (fragments)
Diels and Kranz 1951–22A14: 21i
Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1217: 66.4–218: 66.4–219: 66.4–220: 19i, 66.4–224: 34.225: 8.3, 8.226: 69.244: 34.250: 64i
HERODAS, Mimiambs
1.56: 42i
4: 67i
HERODOTOS
1.42: 34.1.53: 34.1.87.4: 65.8–1.90–91: 34.1.131: 8i

1.150: 55.15–2.25.2: 82.2.43: 12i
2.44: 12i
2.51.2: O.20–2.73: 8.2.144: 42i
2.145: 11i
2.146.2: 46.2–2.153.1: 34.2.156.5: 34.2, 34.2.156.5–6: 40.3.37: 66i
3.59.2: 36.4.79: 52i
4.103.1–2: 36i
4.149.2: 69i
6.105: 11i
7.178: 80i
7.189: 80–82i, 80i
7.191: 80–82i, 80i
8.55: 32i
8.65: 42.8.138.3: 54.HESIOD
Theogony: 15i, 82.1–114: Oi, 76i
1: 76.11–21: Oi
17: O.22–34: 76i
22: 76.26–28: 76.27–28: 86i
53–62: 76i

53–54: 77i
55: 67.77–79: 76.8–94–97: 34.94–95: 34i
104: 34.106: 13.116–122: 58i
116–118: 26i
117–118: 26.117: 26.119: 18.123–125: 3i
124–125: 5i
124: O.126–153: 4i, 26i
128: 4.132–210: 13i
133: 83i
134: 10i
135: 77i, 79i
139–146: 19i
154–210: 4i
154–175: 26i
183–187: 26.2, 51i, 69i
188–206: 55i
201–202: 58i
211–225: 3i
211–212: 85i, 86i
215: 83.217–222: 59i, 79i
220–222: 61i
223–234: 61i
224: 3.227: 85.
233–236: 23i
240–264: 24i
273: 71.274–275: 83.278–281: 17i
289–292: 83.337–370: 22.349: 55.353: O.358: 71.360: 72i
363–368: 83.4–371–374: 9i, 34i, 78i
378–382: 78i, 80–82i
383–385: 33i
389–403: 83.398: 83.404–409: 1i
404–408: 34i, 35i
411–452: 1i
426: 29.453–506: 13i
453–500: 26i, 31i
454: 84i
469–473: 69i
497: 84i
501–506: 19i
517–520: O.28–523–534: 12.535–570: 28i
617–731: 13i
687–710: 19i, 66.4–717–735: 37.717–733: 18.744–761: 3i, 78.4–
755–766: 85i
775–806: 69.820–880: 15i, 37.820–838: 26.820–822: 18.839–868: 19i
853–868: 66.4–868: 18.869–880: 16i, 80–82i
881–885: 17.7, 26.886–926: 15i
886–900: 15.3–5, 26i, 32i
894–898: 32.901–906: 79i
901–903: 43i, 62i
904–906: 59i
905: 59.907–911: 60i
912–914: 29i, 40i
915–917: 77i
918–920: 34i
921–923: 2i, 65i
924–926: 26i, 32i
927–929: 66i
933–937: 65i
940–942: 44i
945–946: 66i
969–974: 40.975–976: 74i
986–991: 56.Works and Days: 7i
1: 76i
18: 5.23–24: 76.49–53: 28i

59–82: 66i
60–63: 13.65: 60i
70–71: 13.73–75: 55.9, 60i
73–74: 43i
74–75: 43i
77–82: 28.90–99: O.109–126: 13i
116: 85i
121–126: 73i
126: 73.166–173: 13i
171: 83.197–201: O.25, 61i
220–224: 62i
222–224: 69.252–255: 69.256–262: 61i, 62i, 62.260: 69.267: 62.275–279: 63.14–430: 32.465–469: 40.8–504–558: 80i
578–581: 78.6–594: 81i
614: 50i
618–694: 38i
654–659: 76i
665–668: 17.9–10n
733–734: 84.803–804: 69.Shield: 12i, 32i

122–140: 66i
314–315: 83.433–466: 65i
446–449: 65i
(fragments)
123: 31i, 54i
304: 51i
HESYKHIOS
entry M 1442: 42i
HIPPOLYTOS, Refutation of All Heresies
5.9.8: 39i
6.26.1: 69.HOMER
Iliad: 12i
1.1: 76i, 77i
1.39: 34.1.43–52: 34i
1.396–406: 16i, 32.1.472–474: 34.1.590–594: 66i
1.595–600: 66.1.601–604: 34.6, 76i
2.1–40: 86i
2.100–108: 3i
2.110: 65i
2.426: 66i
2.484–493: 76i
2.540: 65i
2.594–600: 76i
2.731–732: 67i
3.103–104: 8i
3.236–244: 38i
3.383–420: 55i
4.166: 5.4.515: 32.5.337–338: 60i

5.370–417: O.19, 55i
5.385–391: 65i
5.499–502: 40.8–5.748–751: 43i
5.755–863: 65i
5.793–863: 32.5.888–898: 65i
5.899–904: 34.6.130–140: 45.6.130–137: 24.9–11, 51.15–6.132: 46.2–6.135–137: 83.6.402–403: 9.1–6.420: 51i
8.432–435: 43i
9.4–7: 80.9.185–194: 65.5, 76i
9.410–416: 59i
9.571: 69.11.269–270: 2i
13.23–31: 17.5–13.663–670: 59i
14.197–223: 55i
14.200–204: 83.14.224–279: 85i
14.246, 3i: 83i
14.256–261: 3i
14.271–279: 37.14.286–288: 5i
14.325: 44i
14.346–351: 15i
15.100–142: 65i
15.185–195: 17.16.148–151: 81i
16.671–673: 85i

16.681–683: 85i
18.39–49: 24i
18.239: 8.18.372–377: 66i
18.394–405: 24.9–11, 66i, 83.18.417–421: 66i
18.470–473: 66i
18.478–614: 66i
18.484: 8.18.607–608: 83.19.86–90: 69.19.87: 69.19.114–119: 2i
20.74: 9.1–21.195–197: 83.4–21.328–382: 66i
21.391–414: 65i
21.461–467: 34i
21.468–496: 36i
21.470: 36i
21.497–504: 35i
22.199–201: 86i
22.391–394: 34.23.194–230: 80–82i
23.198–201: 80–82i
23.54–107: 86i
23.306–308: 17i
24.1–21: 85.1–24.322–467: 28i
24.525–533: 87.Odyssey: 12i
1.1: 76i, 77i
1.52–54: O.28–4.348–570: 25.4–4.561–569: 13i, 81i, 83.
5.43–54: 28i
5.121–124: 78i
5.125–128: 40.5.282–296: 17i
5.295: 80–82i
5.333–353: 74i
6.122–124: 51i
6.233: 66i
7.91–94: 66i
8.62–73: 76i
8.266–366: 55i, 66i
8.270–272: 8.8.302: 8.8.333–343: 34i
8.486–500: 76i
8.492–495: 32.9.154–155: 51.10.1–75: 23.5–10.19–55: 81.3–10.508–512: 83.11: 18.11.298–304: 38i
11.489–491: 87.11.539: 18.11.576–581: 34.11.601–614: 12i
11.633–635: 29i, 71.4–13.221–440: 32i
13.313: 32.13.345–360: 51i
14.435–436: 51.15.250–251: 78i
19.188: 2i
19.559–567: 86i
21.404–411: 34i

22.297–309: 32.24.1–14: 57i
24.2–5: 57.7–24.60: 76i
HOMERIC HYMNS
to Dionysos (no. 1): 30i
1.6–9: 46.2–1.7: 50.1.11: 52i
1.17: 48.1.21: 44i
to Demeter (no. 2): 27i, 29i, 40i, 41i, 41.5–2.1–8: 51.2.17: 46.2–2.24–27: 8.2.47–50: 40.2.51–61: 1i
2.52: 1i, 9.2.59–63: 40.2.62–90: 1i, 8.2.98–255: 40.2.192–211: 41.2.375–386: 57i
2.414–425: 51.2.420: 72i
2.438–440: 1i
2.473–482: 40.8–2.474–476: 41.5–2.488–489: 40.to Apollon (no. 3): 79.3–3.1–178: 34i
3.14–139: 35.3.16: 35.3.93: O.3.97–116: 2i

3.124–125: 79.3–3.131–132: 34i
3.179–546: 34i
3.186–206: 34.6, 36i, 43i, 65i, 76i
3.230–238: 17i
3.300–374: 34.3.311–325: 66i
3.326–352: 16i
to Hermes (no. 4): 28i, 56i
4.1–19: 28.4.429–430: 77i
4.450–452: 76i
4.533–566: 28i
4.567–568: 28i
4.572: 57i
to Aphrodite (no. 5): 55.5.1–44: 55i
5.1: 77i
5.2–6: 55.4–7, 78.11–5.8–15: 32.5.16–20: 36i
5.21–32: 84i
5.33–43: 55.5.60–64: 60i
5.97–99: 51i
5.218–238: 78i
5.256–275: 51.3, 51.5.262–263: 54i
to Aphrodite (no. 6): 55i, 55.6.5–18: 43i
to Dionysos (no. 7): 30i
7.1: 44i
7.13–15: 50i
7.38–42: 47i
7.44: 50.
to Ares (no. 8): 7.8, 65i
to Artemis (no. 9): 36i
to Aphrodite (no. 10): 55.to Athene (no. 11): 32i
to Hera (no. 12): 16i
to the Mother of the Gods (no. 14): 14i, 27i
14.1: 26.14.3: 27.14.4: 27.to Herakles (no. 15): 12i
to Asklepios (no. 16)
16.2–3: 67i
16.4: 67.to the Dioskouroi (no. 17): 38i
to Hermes (no. 18): 28.to Pan (no. 19): 11i, 14i
19.19–27: 51.19.21: 11.19.27–47: 11i
19.47: 11i
to Hephaistos (no. 20): 66i
to Apollon (no. 21): 34i
to Poseidon (no. 22)
22.6: 17.to Zeus (no. 23): 15i
to Hestia (no. 24): 84i
to the Muses and Apollon (no. 25): 34i, 34.to Dionysos (no. 26): 30i, 46.26.2: 44i
26.3–9: 46.2–to Artemis (no. 27): 36i
27.11–20: 36i
to Athene (no. 28): 32i
to Hestia (no. 29): 84i, 84.29.3–6: 84i

to Earth, Mother of All (no. 30): 14i
30.1: 26.30.3–4: 14.9–30.5–7: 26.30.17: 26.30.34: 78.11–to the Sun (no. 31): 8i
to the Moon (no. 32): 9i
to the Dioskouroi (no. 33): 38i
HORACE, Ars poetica
239: 54.HYGINUS, Fables
1: 74i
4: 74i
166: 66i
IAMBLICHUS, Life of Pythagoras
82: 59.3–155: 12i
186: 63.IBYKOS (fragments, PMGF)
286.8–13: 80i
ISIDOROS, Hymns, 73i
1.1: 73.1.18: 55.15–1.24: 55.15–2.10: 73.3.34: 42.9–KALLIMAKHOS
Hymns
to Zeus (no. 1): 15i
1.32–48: 51.1.52–54: 31i
1.46: 31i
to Apollon (no. 2): 34i
2.19: 34.
2.32–35: 34i
2.36–38: 34i
2.42–46: 34i
2.47–54: 34.24–2.59: 35.2.97–104: 34.to Artemis (no. 3): 36i
3.110: 34.3.189–203: 36.3.204: 36.3.237–258: 36i
to Delos (no. 4): 35.4.79–85: 51.Bath of Pallas (no. 5)
5.1–56: 32i
5.13–32: 32.(fragments)
194.28–31: 34.229: 34.466: 40.Supplementum hellenisticum 276.9: 50.KHRYSIPPOS (fragments, Long and Sedley 1987)
47A: 15i, 66.6–47O: 66.KLEANTHES
Hymn to Zeus: 15i
1: 10i
2: 10i, 64i
7: 4.3, 10.21–9–13: 19i, 66.4–12–13: 10i
15–16: 10i, 15.3–32: 10i
(fragments, Long and Sedley 1987)
47O: 66.
LIKYMNIOS (fragments, PMG)
769: 68i
LONGUS, Daphnis and Chloe
3.23: 11.LUCAN, Civil War
6.413–830: 1.LUCIAN
Alexander or the False Seer: 9i
Dialogue of the Gods
22: 11.On the Syrian Goddess
6–7: 56i
True History
1.9–27: 9i
2.14: 80.3–LUCRETIUS, On the Nature of Things: 10i
1.1–49: 55i, 55.1.1–27: 55.4–MAGICAL PAPYRI (PGM)
1.262–347: 34i
1.296–297: 34.1.297–327: 8i
1.310: 10i, 10.1.341–347: 8i
2.1–64: 34i
2.64–184: 34i
2.86: 34.2.99: 34.3.187–262: 8i, 34i
4.436–461: 8i
4.455: 34.4.930–1114: 8i
4.939: 10i
4.988–989: 34.4.1748–1810: 6.
4.1928–2005: 8i
4.1985: 34.4.2241–2358: 9i
4.2326: 13.4.2441–2784: 9i
4.2559: 9.4.2608–2610: 9.4.2665: 72.4.2714–2783: 1i
4.2718: 9.4.2747: 29.15–4.2749: 29.15–4.2785: 62i
4.2785–2870: 1i
4.2793–2795: 9.4.2795–2799: 69.4.2795: 59.3–4.2832–2833: 3.4, 10.4.2832: 10i
4.2841: 13.4.2855: 70.4.2857: 3.4.2858–2860: 69.4.2860: 62i
4.2861: 59.3–4.2863: 70.4.2866: 70.6–4.2868: 70.4.2916–2917: 10.4.2916: 3.4.2917: 10i
4.2934: 55.4.3086–3124: 13.4.3099: 13.4.3100: 13i

4.3165–3166: 73.6.1–47: 34i
8.74–81: 8i
MELANIPPIDES (fragments, PMG)
764: 14i
MESOMEDES
Hymn to Nemesis: 62i, 72i
1: 61i
5: 61.6–6: 64.7–8: 61i
11: 61i
13: 61i
14: 61.18: 62.Hymn to Physis
1: 10.9, 10.2: 10.2, 10.3: 10.6–15–20: 10.15–16: 10i
19–20: 10i
Hymn to the Sun: 8i, 34i
MIMNERMOS (fragments)
12: 83i
12.1–3: 8.MNASEAS (fragments)
18: 47i
36: 48i
MOUSAIOS, fragments (Bernabé 2004–2007)
11T–14T: 9i
75: 32i
81: 3i
87: 1.NONNUS, Dionysiaca

38.150: 2i
40.369: 12.ORACULA SIBYLLINA
13.78: 70.ORPHIC LITERATURE
Argonautika
31: 29.968: 69.(fragments, Bernabé 2004–2007)
12: 15.3–14: 15.3–21–22: 83i
31: 15.3–31.4: 9.31.6: 9.32–33: 62.57–59: 37i
59: 30.76: 12.77: 55.78–79: 6.78: 5i
79: 12.80: 6i, 6.2, 9.81.2: 70.82: 59i
86: 6i, 11i, 11.10–87: 14i
88: 14i
97: 6.102: 8i, 34.110–113: 55.111: 5i
112–113: 3i
114: 6.121: 9.4, 19.16–17, 21i

124–125: 5i
126: 6.129–136: 6i
130: 6.134: 9.140: 6.144–164: 6i
148: 3i
149: 3i, 4i, 14.151: 4.153: 7.155: 9i, 9.1–156: 9.165–167: 6i
166: 10.168–171: 3i
168: 10.170: 10.172–173: 6.174–189: 4i
176: 59i, 79i
179: O.19, 77i, 83i
186: 83.189: O.18, 55i
202: 84i
202(iv): 16i
206: 40i
220: 13i
222: 13i
223: 85.1–225: 13i
228: 19i
233: 62.236: 17.237–243: 15.3–
241: 3i, 13.243: 15.3–243.3: 9.243.16: 9.4, 62.243.27: 10.246: 63i
247: 62.2, 64i
248: 62.2, 63i, 64i
250: 79i
252: 43i, 62i, 79i
253: 79i
254: 60i
257: 36i
260: 55i
261: 58i
262: 58i, 68i
263–266: 32i
267–268: 31i
269: 19i, 66i
272: 66i
274: 66.6–275: 65.279: 31i
284: 70.2–3, 70.6–288: 29.12–292: 70.2–293: 70i, 70.2–3, 70.6–294: 29.297: 31i
301–331: 37i
304: 16i
305(ii): 34.306: 4.309: 66i
311(x): 34.
314–316: 44i
319: O.28–322: 30.2, 46i
322(v): 34.323: 8i
325–326: 30.327: 44i
328: 44i, 48.329: 46i
339: 57i
340: 18.2, 71.350: 53i
356: 36i
360: 58.5–7, 81i
361: 76i
362: 76i, 76.8–365: 67i
370: 4i
379–402: 41i
387: 72i
390: 41.5–391: 41.5–7, 42i
394–395: 41.395: 42.398: 14i
399: 40i
400: 1.4, 36.3, 40.407: 59.3–413: 8i
413.1: 28.413.2: 51.15–413.4: 65.413.7: 17i
413.12: 11.10–414: 11.10–
415: 77i
417–420: 11i
466: 1.536: 8i
537: 8i
538–545: 8i
540: 6.5–7, 6.567: 31i
576: 45.577: 48i
578: 4.602–605: 27i
610–611: 27i
851: 69.852: 5.895–898: 24.9–896: 24.9–11, 76i
898: 76i
902–906: 76i
907–908: 76i
OVID
Amores
1.13: 78.6–Metamorphoses
1.85–145: 54i
1.253–261: 66.4–1.689–712: 11.1.746–2.400: 8i
2.161–313: 66.4–2.401–507: 7.2.600–634: 67i
3.257–313: 44i
4.1–40: 45.4.285–388: 51i
4.390–415: 45.
4.416–542: 74i
5.359–384: 58.5–6.146–312: 35i
6.675–721: 80i
7.690–862: 78i
8.738–878: 51.9.1–88: 25.4–9.273–323: 2i
10.1–71: 87.10.25–29: 58.5–10.298–518: 56i
11.146–193: 54i
11.602–604: 85.11.633–643: 86i
13.588: 78i
PAUSANIAS
1.2.5: 77i
1.4.5: 54.1.14.3: 41.5–1.14.6: 32.1.18.2: 32i
1.18.5: 2i
1.18.7: 13i
1.19.2: 59i
1.20.3: 66i
1.22: 79i
1.22.3: 55.1.22.7: 80i
1.24.3: 32.1.24.7: 33i
1.28.6: 69.1.33.2: 61i
1.33.7: 61i
1.33.8: 61i
1.37.2: 80–82i, 81i

1.40.4: 43i
1.40.6: 3i
1.42.7: 74i
1.44.8: 74i, 75i
2.1.8: 24i, 75i
2.2.1: 75i
2.2.6–7: 50i
2.7.5–6: 50i
2.11.6: 68i
2.12.1: 80–82i
2.14.2: 41.5–2.14.3: 41.5–2.24.5: 36.2.30.2: 1i
2.30.3: 36.2.30.6: 17i
2.31.3: 85i
2.33.2: 17i
2.34.2–3: 80–82i
2.37.5: 44.6–3.16.7–11: 36.3.17.1: 36.3.19.4: 43i
3.19.5: 81i
3.19.7: 73.3.21.9: 23i
3.23.8: 74i
3.24.3–4: 74i
3.26.1: 74i
4.30.6: 72i
4.33.3: 76.8–4.33.4–5: 76.8–5.7.6–7: 12i
5.11.1–10: 33i
5.14.7: 19i

5.14.8: 33i
5.14.10: 19i
5.15.5: 59.11–5.15.6: 32.5.16.1–8: 16i
5.18.1: 85i
5.18.2: 62.5.20.3: 18.6.24.6–7: 60i
6.24.8: 54i
7.5.3: 61i
7.17.10–12: 27i
7.25.9: 55i
7.26.8: 72i
8.4.2: 51.8.21.3: 2i
8.25.4–10: 69i
8.31.3: 12i
8.36.6: 80–82i
8.37.1: 59.11–8.37.10: 11i
8.38.5: 11i
9.12.3: 47i
9.16.1–2: 72i
9.16.6: 50i
9.19.5: 12i
9.25.4: 59.11–9.27.1–4: 58i
9.27.2: 2i
9.27.8: 12i
9.29.1–9.31.3: 76i
9.29.2: 76i
9.29.3: 76i
9.29.4: 76i
9.30.4: 76i

9.31.2: 6.9.33.3: 29.9.33.7: 32.9.35.1–7: 60i
9.35.2: 43i
9.35.3: 60i
9.39.8: 77i
9.39.13: 77i
9.41.6: 14.10.4.3: 52i
10.5.6: 17i, 79.3–10.6.2–3: 34.10.38.7: O.20–PHILODEMUS, On Piety
11: 64i
14: 64i
PHILOSTRATUS
Heroicus
53.5–7: 66i
Imagines
2.16: 75i
PINDAR
Isthmian Odes
8.31–45a: 79i
Nemean Odes
3.23: 12i
7.1–4: 2i
10.80–82: 38i
Olympian Odes
2.25–28: 44.6–2.28–30: 24.9–2.68–80: 13i
6.41–42: 2i
7.20–80: 8i
7.35–44: 32i
12.2: 72i

13.63–82: 32.Pythian Odes
2.10: 28.3: 67i
3.51–52: 67.3.77–79: 11i
11.2: 24.9–(fragments)
39: 72i
41: 72i
70b.6–21: 27.11, 45.70b.12–14: 51.15–70b.17–18: 32.70b.19–21: 36.95: 11i
96: 11i
122.4: 55.165: 51.169a.1–4: 64i
169a.1–2: 64.PLATO
Apology
41a: 18.Cratylus
396b–c: 4.397c: 8i
400b–c: 87.3–401b2: 84i
401d1–2: 84i
404a: 13.404c: 16i
405a: 34i
406a–b: 35i
407e–408b: 28.412c–413d: 8.
Critias
109c–d: 66i
112b: 66i
Euthydemus
275c–d: 77i
Gorgias
484b: 64i
523a–524a: 18.Laws: 8i
672b: 16i
796d: 31i, 38i
815c–d: 54i
887d–e: 8i
920d: 66i
Phaedo
62b: 87.3–69c: 45.118a: 67i
Phaedrus: 58.229c: 80i
Protagoras
320d: 13.321d–322a: 66i
Republic
364e: 76i
451a: 61i
616b–617d: 8.9, 59.617d–621a: 59i
Symposium: 58.180d–181c: 55i
206d2: 2i
215a–222d: 54.Timaeus: 66.6–38b–39e: 9.PLINY THE ELDER, Natural History

2.6: 7i
PLUTARCH
Alexander
2.9: 46.De defectu oraculorum
419b–e: 11i
De facie quae in orbe lunae apparet
921f: 59.3–922c: 59.3–928c–d: 5.942d–945d: 59.3–De Iside et Osiride
355e–356a: 34.356a: 34.364e: 42i
365a: 46i
365e–f: 42.9–367e: 8.375f: 34.378f: 53i
De primo frigido
949b–c: 59.3–953d: 46i
De stoicorum repugnantiis
1053a: 8.1056c: 59.11–14, 59.Mulierum virtutes
249e–f: 46i
Pericles
13.8: 32.Quaestiones conviviales
671b: 56i
743d: 77i
Quaestiones graecae
299a–b: 30.3–
299c–300a: 45.Theseus
25.5: 75i
PROCLUS, Hymns
1: 8i, 34i
1.13–14: 34.16–1.19–20: 34.16–1.21–24: 34.1.23: 34.16–1.26: 56.2: 55i, 55.2.3: 55.5: 55.7: 32i
7.3: 32.7.4: 32.7.7–15: 44i
7.43–44: 32.PSELLOS, Quaenam sunt graecorum opiniones de daemonibus
3: 39i
PSEUDO-ARISTOTLE, De mundo
401a25: 15.3–PTOLEMY, Harmonics
3.7: 34.16–3.12: 34.16–PYTHAGOREAN GOLDEN VERSES
52–53: 10i
63–64: 10i
SAPPHO (fragments)
1: 55.1.8–10: 55.1.21–24: 55i, 55.2: 55.5: 24i
17: 44i

31: 66.104: 78.6–111: 65i
140: 56i
198: 58i
200: 55.SERVIUS
on Vergil Aeneid
7.337: 69.on Vergil Eclogues
2.31: 11i
SIMIAS
Wings: 58i
(fragments)
13: 24.9–SIMONIDES (fragments, PMG)
555: 28.SOLON (fragments)
18: 87.20: 87.27: 87.SOPHOKLES
Antigone
361–364: 67.1146–1152: 42.Oedipus at Kolonos
40: 69i
100: 77i
461–492: 70i
712–715: 17i
1382: 62.Oedipus Tyrannus
1099–1109: 51.Philoktetes
400–401: 27.Women of Trakhis
213: 35.
(fragments)
12: 62.752: 8.13, 8.STESIKHOROS (fragments, PMGF)
S17: 12.3, 83i
STOBAEUS
1.6.13: 72i
STOICISM (fragments)
Long and Sedley 146A: 66.6–46B: 66.6–7, 66.46C: 15i, 66.6–46G: 66.6–7, 66.46J: 66.47C: 66.6–7, 66.47D: 5.47F: 66.6–53X: 66.53Y: 66.54A: 16i
SVF
2.305: 25.2–2.1066: 21i
2.1070: 21i
2.1075: 21i
STRABO
9.2.25: 76i
9.3.3: 34.10.3.15: 49i
10.3.17: 76i
10.3.18: 48i
10.3.19: 54i
10.4.13: 36.10.5.5: 35.14.1.20: 35.TELESTES (fragments, PMG)

805: 32.809: 14i
THEOGNIS
425–28: 87.701–712: 87.1135–1138: O.THEOKRITOS, Idylls
2: 9i
15: 56i
THEOLOGY OF ARITHMETIC, 12.29: 63.40: 63.THEOPHRASTOS, On Fire
1: 8.THUCYDIDES
3.104: 35.TIMOTHEUS (fragments, PMG)
778(b): 36.TYRTAIOS (fragments)
10: 65.8–VERGIL
Aeneid
6.645: 11i
6.893–896: 86i
7.337: 69.Georgics
4.387–527: 25.4–4.453–506: 87.Eclogues
6: 54.6.31ff.: 10.14–16, 11i
XENOPHANES (fragments, Kirk, Raven, and Schofield 1983)
175–179: 8.175: 8.183: 22.XENOPHON
Hellenika

6.3.6: 12i
Memorabilia
2.21–34: 12i
Symposium
2.11: 31.1–ZENO (fragments)
Long and Sedley 146D: 66.6–SVF
1.117: 21i

Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Contents
Preface
Introduction
The Orphic Hymns
Orpheus to Mousaios
1. To Hekate
2. To Prothyraia
3. To Night
4. To Sky
5. To Ether
6. To Protogonos
7. To the Stars
8. To the Sun
9. To Selene
10. To Physis
11. To Pan
12. To Herakles
13. To Kronos
14. To Rhea
15. To Zeus
16. To Hera
17. To Poseidon
18. To Plouton
19. To Zeus the Thunderbolt
20. To Astrapaios Zeus
21. To the Clouds
22. To the Sea
23. To Nereus
24. To the Nereids
25. To Proteus
26. To Earth
27. To the Mother of the Gods
28. To Hermes

29. Hymn to Persephone
30. To Dionysos
31. Hymn to the Kouretes
32. To Athene
33. To Nike
34. To Apollon
35. To Leto
36. To Artemis
37. To the Titans
38. To the Kouretes
39. To Korybas
40 To Eleusinian Demeter
41. To Mother Antaia
42. To Mise
43. To the Seasons
44 To Semele
45. Hymn to Dionysos Bassareus and Triennial
46. To Liknites
47. To Perikionios
48. To Sabazios
49. To Hipta
50. To Lysios Lenaios
51. To the Nymphs
52. To the God of Triennial Feasts
53. To the God of Annual Feasts
54. To Silenos Satyros and the Bacchae
55. To Aphrodite
56. To Adonis
57. To Chthonic Hermes
58. To Eros
59. To the Fates
60. To the Graces
61. Hymn to Nemesis
62. To Dike
63. To Justice
64. Hymn to Nomos
65. To Ares
66. To Hephaistos
67. To Asklepios

68. To Hygeia
69. To the Erinyes
70. To the Eumenides
71. To Melinoe
72. To Tyche
73. To Daimon
74. To Leukothea
75. To Palaimon
76. To the Muses
77. To Mnemosyne
78. To Dawn
79. To Themis
80. To Boreas
81. To Zephyros
82. To Notos
83. To Okeanos
84. To Hestia
85. To Sleep
86. To Dream
87. To Death
Notes
Select Bibliography
Index Nominum
Index Locorum
392