ORPHIC LITHICA
Ancient Greek Didactic Poetry on Stones and Gems
Translated by GPT-5 Reasoning Model
==================================================

To bestow upon mortals a gift from Zeus Alexikakos,
called Eriounios, of Maia, he came bearing,
the son, so that we might have a sure ward against woe.
Be glad and receive, mortals; I declare to the prudent,
to those whose heart is good and yields to the Deathless Ones.
but for the witless it is not lawful to find the undefiled boon.
and too beforetime, exulting in this same gift,
the Letoid led his son, the healer of mortals, to the deathless ones,
he came leading to snow‑rich Olympos, and prudent
Pallas Athenaia led Herakles, savior of the people;
and the Kronid Cheiron too leapt over the lofty aither,
hastening toward Olympos, when he learned of the immortal gifts.
But indeed those men the blameless halls of Zeus—
—received with rejoicing, by far the best of the god-born.
But for us on earth the Golden‑wanded bids us to live in prosperity,
taking delight, unacquainted with wickedness.
And whomsoever among men his prudent heart should bid
to enter the much‑beloved cave of Hermês,
where he has laid down a multitude of goods of every sort,
straightway he would go, bearing many provisions in both hands,
homeward, having escaped tear‑wet distress;
nor would an incurable disease subdue him in his halls,
nor would he ever, cowering at the dread might of enemies,
withdraw back again, leaving exultant victory;
nor, as an athlete dust‑covered in the contest,
would his spirit impel him to lust for any counter‑violence,
not even if a man with brazen limbs and unbending strength
should confront him outright, eager to carry off the wreath.
Aye, him too a lion to the mountain‑haunting beasts,
dread, and to the peoples, like a daimon, will I fashion.
and it also bestows on him, even among Zeus-nurtured kings,
to be held in honor with ease among foreign men.
And him even beardless, tender‑skinned youths, with lovely hands,
will ever rush to clasp with their palms,
and a soft maiden ever draws him to the golden bed,
an unwearied maiden, eager for love.
and, as he prays, it will reach the ears of the Ever-Existing Ones,
the prayer; and, though the sea is being churned, giving it no heed,
he will step upon the dry land with wave-untroubled feet.
Even raiders, savage men, will flee him, though he is alone.
and the slaves, supposing him to be their father,
will do him honor, and will love the house of their own lord.
If he should wish to know, he will learn whatever things men
devise in secret within their own minds,
and whatever the mist-wanderers have cried out among themselves,
shrieking to mortals a song that may not be uttered,
the birds of omen, swift interpreters of great Dios.
and to still the hiss of a serpent coming along the ground,
he will know, and to quench the venom of creeping serpents.
I will grant him also a man falling under Selene’s wrath
to rescue, and [to free him] from the baneful disease of elephantiasis;
and to drive off the soul of a dead man, which, coming forth from murky
Aidēs, might draw near to each man.
Other countless gifts of Hermes of many counsels
are laid away, brought within a cavern,
deathless, unerring, swiftly accomplishing each thing;
of these, a demigod and blessed is whoever attains any of them.
those things for me to proclaim, people‑stirring Argeiphontes
stirred among mortals, bidding me
to sound forth from my breast the honey‑tongued voice of song.
But not altogether do mortals have a desire to take thought for sound‑mindedness.
Rather, straightway, presba, they dishonor you with transgressions;
and, hearing from their fathers of Arete, mother of heroes,
they flee headlong, and unhelping toil,
the unhelping toil of life they greatly shudder at.
Nor does lordly prosperity keep company with them in their halls,
nor does anyone know to hold intimate converse with the immortal gods.
And they, indeed, drove forth from cities and from fields the noble—
—ah, wretches!—wisdom, committing outrage against Eriounios.
And the work wrought by the earlier demigods perished.
But he is grievous and hateful straightway to all,
to whom the peoples are wont to confer the by-name of ‘magos’.
And he, in the dust, his head cut off beneath the blade,
lies stretched in baneful death—a godlike man;
but others, like beasts, unknowing and untaught,
bereft of daemonic understanding, neither by divine aid
know the escape from man‑destroying wickedness,
nor any wonder‑work that would be much admired;
rather, a black cloud about their wits,
having twined itself all around, begrudges them the going to the flowery
meadow of Virtue, many‑wreathed.
But on my part I solemnly vow treasures to those who hearken
to show, far more preeminent than rich gold;
and I seek a stout‑hearted man, who of each one
would eagerly make trial, be intent on it, and labor,
who is teachable, and who would question those who know.
For not without toil an end to words and to deeds
is the wide-seeing Kronides minded to grant; but even him,
toward the west, panting, through the blazing aether,
the colts lead—shining Helios—together with his chariot.
[lacuna]
I shall take greater delight, on finding the counsel of a prudent man,
than in gold, the lord of all men.
For I came face to face with him as he was leading a sacrificial victim for Hêlios,
going from the countryside to the city, Theiodamas the shrewd;
and, taking his hand in mine, I addressed him with these words:
“To the city—unless urgent necessities press you utterly—
it will be easy for you, comrade, to arrive even tomorrow;
but now, as I am going on my way to a banquet, a god himself
has stirred you to come meet me; to this kindly nod assent,
to follow. And sacrifices befitting the sacred are underway,
which good mortals perform; and the dear heart rejoices
of the Immortals, whenever the best lead choruses for them.”
I shall lead you by no long bypath; for you see
me going toward the ridge of our fields.
There, being newborn, once I dared to go up alone,
following after the two nimble partridges that had fled ahead;
and they—indeed, so long as each, on hearing its name,
standing, would keep waiting; but, having spied me reaching out,
before I could snatch with my hands, dodging, it would keep escaping ahead.
But I, in haste, would fall upon its mouth when I came near;
and back again, springing up from the earth, I kept pursuing.
But when indeed, pressing on toward the ridge, he went to the topmost peak,
then they, all of a sudden, raised a shrill shout,
and they rushed swifter than a boar-spear or a dart
toward the lofty-leaved oak, having seen beforehand a dread serpent charging against it,
its jaw flung wide, full of death.
But I, having drawn near, did not see him as he darted head-on against me;
my eyes had been turned aside by the birds;
until, when he had lifted from the earth his dread neck,
I realized his frame already eager to snatch its prey.
There, if anyone observed me rushing back,
neither that I was following after the storm‑footed partridges,
nor did he suppose that I was being borne on childish feet.
For I had taken the fearful sign to be a long‑winged eagle,
and a breath of wind as well; for there was a bane at my feet.
and often it kept grazing the hem of my cloak with its points;
and a monstrous beast would have gaped over me beyond my destined lot,
had not my mind swiftly arisen, rushing toward the altar,
the one which the men of old established for Phaesimbrotos.
And upon it there had been left a dry scurf from an olive-wood splinter,
which the all-devouring fire, once quenched, abandoned.
Having snatched it, I turned to face the baneful serpent.
And the terrible might of the mountain-roamer raged to fight, seeing me eager.
It kept coiling tightly,
bending its long back in well-rounded curves; but upon one [coil] another,
and then yet another—like the whirling of a rolling wheel;
and even above the altar it was lifting its neck(s) aloft,
hissing far louder than my own shouting.
and, striking the unbreakable brow of the mountain‑dwelling crag,
about it they would keep breaking off the calcined nodule of Akikē (agate);
nor then was he fated to be subdued by the tawny beast.
Therefore, while the goatherds were pasturing at a distance,
two dogs of my father, barking as they followed after me,
having recognized me, ran up; for I was very gentle to them.
They, baying, rushed upon him; but he straightway
sped to face the pair; and I, leaping to the earth
headlong, as when some hare, fleeing the hook‑clawed Eagle of Zeus,
hides in the dense thickets, a hare,
even so, like him, mingling with the flocks, away from the deadly beast,
I hid, cowering in the midst among the kids.
So long then as my father lived, unscathed,
ever would he bring my calf to the warding altar,
paying to Hēlios the life‑ransom for his own child;
but when the Moirai led him away from the sun,
I myself, driving from the herd a fat calf,
spring‑born, thriving at the udder of its youthful mother,
I go to the ridge‑top, leading a sweet chorus of companions;
and with them went likewise these two serpent‑slaying dogs
of their own accord; and sweet delight abides about the lord’s altar,
delight—the ground is green, and soft grasses upon it,
and shade beneath shaggy elms; and close by them
water ever‑flowing, beneath the base of a smooth rock,
gushing up white, it babbles, like to a song.
Let us go; for it is by no means right to refuse the gods’ feast.
Thus I spoke; and the daemonic man addressed me thus:
But as for you, may lord Phaesímbrotos ever lead you out of grievous misery,
and may he send you,
to the great house of tearless wealth, for the sake of his own goodwill.
Nor indeed will I myself deprive you of recompense.
But since, then, you go up to lead in a sacrificial victim,
so that, as you pray, the god may hear, I will put it into your hand.
Take up in your hands the crystal, the radiant, transparent stone,
a stone, an emanation of fire-bright, immortal radiance.
and in the aether of the Deathless the imperishable heart rejoices greatly;
this one, if indeed, holding it in your hands, you come to the temple,
none of the Blessed will refuse your prayers.
But hearken, that you may learn the potency of the silvery stone.
For if you should wish, without mighty fire, to kindle the flames of fire,
I enjoin you to set it above dry torches;
but it, when facing Helios as he beams,
straightway stretches a slight ray over the torches.
But when it touches dry and resin‑rich wood,
it will raise smoke, then a little fire, and after that a great flame;
and that flame, they say, men of old called the sacred fire.
From none of the others do I, for my part, look for a stronger flame,
to burn thus the thigh-bones, pleasing to the Immortals.
And besides this too, friend, I make known to you a great marvel:
the very stone that is the cause of flame—if very swiftly
you snatch it from the fire, it is cold to the touch,
and, bound about the kidneys, it will save the sufferer.
Secondly, to you as you pray I bestow a succoring stone,
brimful of wondrous milk, like a breast
of a first-delivered bride or a rich‑uddered bleating she‑goat;
this one the ancient‑born called Adamas the Subduer,
because it bends the mind of the Blessed, so that
in reverence for the burnt‑offerings they wish to pity the earth‑dwellers;
while others named it Lēthaios, since always
it keeps mortals and immortals from remembering wretched misery;
and it makes the mind Eriounios,
charming it, urging it to take gentle counsel in its wits.
But others have judged “Galaktis” to be the better
name to give the stone, since indeed, when it is rubbed,
there exudes from within an ichor wholly like white milk.
And a proof of this too will be at hand for you, if you are willing.
For when you see the udders of the flocks dwindling,
what will you do, dear child, when it concerns your kids,
whom once, having slipped away from a monstrous wild beast, you implored,
that you might stand beside them, steadfast—while they in the pen
delicate as they are, shall bleat piteously all around you?
Of these, bid their sorrowing mothers straightway
to bathe in the dark-gleaming eddies of the springs;
and, taking your stand opposite Helios as he rises,
purify first, going around them all;
and, after pouring brine in a mixing-bowl and fine stone‑ground barley‑meal,
go through the flock and the band of goats,
sprinkling along the shaggy back of each with a fruit-bearing twig;
and they, all of them, being warmed/cheered, about the folds
suddenly, with their young, rich in milk, will form their ranks in order.
and those who, milk-fed, having had their fill beneath the breasts,
will once more, high-spirited, remember their leapings.
and your [stone], when mixed together with sweet mead,
urge the Nymph to drink it, so that an infant son
she may nurse, drunken at her breasts, beside the ever‑flowing springs.
and then the nurse, hanging the stone about a child’s neck,
will with the stone restrain the ill‑counseling eyes of Megaira;
and even blameless kings will stand in awe of you,
as you hold the stone in your hand—and the countless tribes of men;
and most of all the immortal gods will bring to pass all things that accord with your heart,
heeding your prayers.
And one should also, holding the well‑petaled, four‑rayed stone,
pray beside the altar while a hecatomb is being slain.
Even if you should bear in your hand a chip of a tree‑grown stone,
the mind of the ever‑existing gods would be all the more propitiated.
For you shall behold very many trees, as in a flowery garden,
luxuriant with close‑set branches.
For this reason, men too bestowed upon it—upon the tree‑like agate—
a by‑name, because for it one part was of agate,
while another part has, to be looked upon, the form of shaggy woodland.
and it, for your oxen who cleave the plough‑land,
to fasten about both horns, or else around the stout
shoulder of the unwearied, ploughing ploughman;
and then from heaven grain‑tressed Dēmētēr
would come into the furrow, her bosom full of fruit.
Examine, and, having a marvel of a deer, draw near with it,
a horn for the Immortals; for the mind of the heaven-dwellers
smiles when they behold the work of much-wrought nature;
indeed it is a horn, such as grow from the head of the long-footed deer;
the crown of the head, to be sure, never produces a stone,
yet nonetheless that thing proves to be a hard stone;
nor could you know for certain whether it is horn or stone,
until, by handling it all around, you find it to be a true stone.
Always it will set shaggy down upon your head,
even if you are thin‑haired; for if you, with oil—
[missing]
once it has been ground, rub your temples with it every day,
and new hairs will blossom around your brow.
A stalwart man, leading his first‑wedded maiden to the marriage‑bed,
should carry this stone as a witness of lovely delight;
and it will keep the two together in unbreakable concord,
unto latest old age and through all their days.
And to the herdsman of field‑roaming bulls, of Zeus Aigiochos—
to the ivy‑robed son—I declare a stone to be dear to his heart,
a foreign one, I announce, very radiant,
bathed by the waters of the Syrian‑born, loud‑resounding Euphrates;
which, when you have offered victims for the sake of planting,
straightway, clothing your vineyard with grape‑laden vine‑shoots,
will grant you to draw much wine.
And if, having brought a well‑wrought, spring‑hued jasper,
someone should perform holy rites, the heart of the Blessed is gladdened,
and for him they will sate the parched fields with clouds;
for this stone brings abundant rain to the drought‑stricken fields.
Lychnis, keep off from our plain the roaring spate and the hail,
and our banes, all that are marshalled against the fields;
for the mind of the Immortals loves you, and from the altars
you send forth a flame, like crystal, without fire;
and in you there lies a counterpoised might: whenever fire
wraps the belly of a brimming cauldron,
the water within, though the fire presses hard, remains cold;
but if someone leave the cauldron in cold ashes,
it bubbles, seething, within the stout bronze.
And in turn, among these, they are said to be excellent and glass-like,
by mortal sacrificers—the topaz-stones.
I declare to you that the bright opal too delights the Celestials,
splendid, possessing the tender complexion of a lovely child;
and that it too has been fashioned as a helper for the eyes.
And with the pine’s tears empower the might of the obsidian stone,
and mix in fragrant myrrh, and with silver-white scales
I bid you make it scale-covered and gleaming.
For straightway, when you sprinkle these things above the fire,
the Immortals will grant divine oracles of things to come, both of good
and grievous; and you will know whatever you have desired.
and the scaly stone wards off the grievous pains of the sinews.
Two stones of Helios are to be found, O golden‑haired one,
both wondrous; and awe shall be yours when you behold them.
In both, true rays are implanted within,
upright, gleaming; to behold, like hairs,
yet their appearance is that of other stones; you will discern the one
as a white crystal; and if it did not have hairs within,
it would have been crystal; and the other, in form when viewed full-on, is like chrysolite to behold;
and if it too did not have hairs,
it would have been chrysolite; yet I declare the pair to be well made.
For into them indeed Hēlios cast a great life-bringing breath,
so that mortals straightway might accomplish illustrious deeds,
and be more august to behold; and you will hold them in reverence.
For at once the august form of heroes comes upon them,
those who knowingly wear the god’s great gift about them.
Dare even to appease the deathless with kindly intent, by means of the Magnesian stone;
and her the battle-furious Ares loved exceedingly,
since, whenever she draws near to the grey iron,
just as a maiden, soft‑skinned, taking [him] by the hands,
embraces the unwed youth at her desirous bosom,
so she, snatching, ever draws it toward her own body,
and back again is unwilling to let go the warlike iron.
Indeed, they say it is even the attendant of Helios’ maiden,
whenever she scatters enchantments;
and of overbold Aeëtes, the child‑slaying [daughter],
the many‑devising maiden made it renowned. But I, for my part,
bid you to learn concerning your wife, whether it
keeps her bed and body pure from another man.
For indeed, having brought it in, set it secretly beneath the bedding;
singing with your lips a mortal-bewitching song, softly;
and she, settling to slumber and very sweetly indeed in sleep,
stretching her hands about you, longs to enfold you;
and if divine Aphrodite should drive her on with wantonness,
from aloft to the earth she will be stretched out, having fallen headlong.
And let two brothers wear the Magnesian stone,
longing to flee the temper of boundless strife;
and the peoples gathered into the assembly, with a fair voice,
you will enchant, bringing honey-sweet Peitho into their breasts.
And indeed I, being able, could recount many other things as well,
wondrous marvels of this stone; but why should I speak further to you of the heavenly ones?
It swiftly inclines and draws the heart of those who, though far aloft,
so that, for your sake,
very quickly, like parents, they may bring your desire to fulfillment.
But indeed these things can even be put to the test straightaway,
all, as many as I have proclaimed, will be at hand, if to the altar
we should go. For indeed, you know, the man who follows after me
carries upon his mighty shoulders a variegated stock of stones.
Now, since far more of the bypath remains for us,
and yet the great glare of the serpent still shakes your heart,
learn too not to fear the poisons of long snakes.
For you are bidden to grind the Ophiētis stone fine,
if ever someone should come, pierced by strong teeth,
and sprinkle it upon the wound; and it will be a sure remedy.
And in addition, after grinding the Ostrites stone in wine,
I bid one to drink it unmixed, knowing it to be pain‑assuaging.
And of you too, daimonic one, I shall at once make mention, O stone,
own-sister of the hoary viper and namesake of the viper;
who once made powerless the nine‑year affliction
of Philoctetes, swiftly, under the craft of Machaon.
In no way did the Poïantian in his heart expect that
he would escape the baneful disease, though he longed to.
But he, having learned from his father an evil‑averting aid—
a stone by which one might be healed by casting drugs upon the thigh—
dispatched against the Trojans the slayer of Alexandros;
whom, after the battle, to have come with sound feet,
Priamides Paris himself, though dying, did not believe.
And the Poïantian hero slew Paris the deceiver,
as Helenus was being summoned by the Danaans to bring to Troy
from Lemnos the brother‑murdering bane of his brother.
For to him Phoibos Apollon granted to possess a speaking stone,
an unerring siderite; which indeed to mortals
it pleased others to call the ensouled Oreites,
rounded, somewhat rough, sturdy, dark-hued, compact;
and around it in a ring, around and on every side, fibers
stretch, like wrinkles, drawn across as if incised.
I have learned that for three days out of seven one should avoid the might of Helios,
and shun a woman’s bed and the public baths,
and remain undefiled from the food of ensouled creatures;
and, washing the mindful stone in an ever‑flowing spring,
to cherish it with soft cloths as though it were an infant,
and, having propitiated it like a god with glistening sacrifices,
to make the stone ensouled with very mighty songs.
And in a pure hall, kindling the light with lamps,
with your own hands tend it, lifting the god-revered stone,
like a mother holding her infant son in her arms.
And you too, whenever you wish to hearken to a daimonic voice,
do thus, so that you may learn a marvel within your mind;
for whenever you wear it out completely, shaking it in your hands,
all at once it will rouse the cry of a newborn child
who has cried out in a nurse’s bosom for milk.
You must always keep listening with a steadfast mind,
lest, loosened by fear like a weakling,
casting it from your hands to the ground, you rouse
the dread wrath of the Immortals. But dare to press for the oracle;
for it will declare everything unerringly. And then it,
when it falls silent, bringing it close beside your eyes,
gaze; for you will discern it divinely as it cools.
By this [stone] he declared to the Atreidai that his fatherland was liable to capture,
the Laomedontiad, having obeyed the oracular stone.
And I also make known to you another potency of the siderite (magnet-stone).
for you indeed appear as one before whom creeping things altogether cower.
But he had a far greater and unsleeping dread in his mind,
Philoctetes, ever remembering the viper.
For this cause he would never wish to depart from the prudent son of Priam,
supplicating him, that he might utter some succor,
if ever he should go upon the earth, the mother of beasts,
how he might wholly escape the hoary race.
And to him, Phoibos, the Leto‑born, as witness to his words—
—invoking him, he declared: “These things indeed I shall now recount to you.”
When Akeirekomes was teaching me, a child, to proclaim prophecies,
he first bade me swear a mighty oath,
never to utter a false word to men.
Therefore I will relate to you, with full exactness, each particular.
Attend now, far-darting hero, to my word.
Black Gaia herself, for much-wept mortals,
bears both wickedness and the remedy for each pain;
Gaia brings forth creeping things, and against them she bore a help;
and from Gaia is the stock of all stones, and within them indeed
there is strength without limit and manifold; as many powers as
roots possess, so many do the stones; great indeed was the might of root,
yet that of stone is far greater, since an unfailing force forever
the Mother bestowed on the newborn, and one that is ageless.
but she perishes, though blooming for only a very brief while,
and her might lasts only so long as she draws breath;
but if she breathes out her life, what hope is there any longer from a corpse?
indeed, in plants there is an assemblage of baneful and of good things,
you will learn; whereas in stones you would not easily find ruin.
Indeed, as many as the herbs, so many are the stones; but you, hero,
protected with the Siderite stone from all creeping things,
be bold, even if they come against you in a throng,
go through the very midst of black mischief, not heeding
harm; for it is no longer permitted them to be mindful of their teeth,
not even if, as you walk, they should brush against your feet.
For they are not even able any longer to stand their ground once they have come into view,
but amazement is upon them, and, like creatures being driven,
they rush together; and those, although they had darted in the opposite direction,
straight back again are eager to turn and follow after;
and all at once for them the din is checked; nor do they advance at all,
but, reaching out their very long necks close at hand,
with their tongues they are eager to fawn around, like whelps.
Often too he fell asleep close by the blood-dark serpents,
staying about the hunt in the thickets of Ida,
the hunter Euphorbos, relying on this aid.
For I gave to the one who met me a sacred stone, and never against him
did any from among the very many dare to come and stand face-to-face.
[line missing]
And the best of men, the spearman Melanippus, took delight in very beautiful Euphorbus,
my noble cousin,
longing for a faultless form and, besides the looks, a might more excellent,
of a stalwart youth, spear-famed and fair-tressed.
Therefore, even while roaming in the hunt, never apart
had the son of Hiketaon the strength to remain from Euphorbos,
but always in the shaggy mountains,
laughing aloud, he followed the tracks of the godlike youth with the hounds
and with his companions, and he wished that he alone should attend him.
Indeed, his father would in many ways be eager to hold him back,
vexed that his dear son should fight with wild beasts,
and the might of Priam would restrain him; yet not even then in his heart
was he persuaded, since he would never consent to leave Euphórbos;
yet easily, though against his will, a black adder checked him,
having driven a man-destroying venom from beneath his shin;
then a deadly sickness seized him, because he was about to
be left there on the spot; and that wore him down all the more.
And pitying him as he stretched his hands toward my knees,
then and there I bade him, after grinding this very stone,
to sprinkle the fine powder upon the baleful wound;
and straightway the mighty sickness left the man.
Such a helper for mortals did Gaia bear—the mountain‑stone Oreitēs,
who also brings a remedy to heroes when they are wounded,
and to barren women grants to bear their dear children.
for I proclaim to mortals to accomplish manifold things by means of stones.
as once too, when he had hearkened to his own mother Abarbareê,
who full well knew how to heal the sickness of men,
Boukolides Euphorbus declared that the remedies of the illustrious ophites-stone
have power not only when face-to-face against serpents,
but also to bring light to the eyes, and to draw the grievous
pain out from the head; and once indeed,
having purified a man whose ears suffered a lingering trouble, he straightway bestowed
that he should be keen-hearing even for a delicate cry.
Even once a certain man, under the wrath of golden Aphrodite,
being powerless for the desire‑kindling works of marriage,
it, having healed him, sent him forth to remember love.
But if you should cast it into the fire, the reptiles will flee its odor,
nor will they any longer remain nearby, nor even in their lair.
He even flees when the fumes are roused from gagate,
the one that wears down all mortals with a piercing exhalation.
Soot-dark in hue, broad, not large to behold,
and, like dry pine, it stirs a bright flame.
but it brings a baneful might to the nostrils;
nor will mortals in any way forget the means by which you would wish to expose the sacred disease.
for it straightway bows them down to the ground, dragging them prone;
and they, freed from their own clamor,
wheel to and fro, rolling along the earth.
And, angered at them, she delights her mind, whenever she beholds
them suffering woes, the horned, swift‑footed Mēnē.
And if a woman, having girded herself with the polupharmakon stone,
should receive the smoke darting up beneath her entrails,
then, all at once from within, the black ichor is swiftly drained down,
which, lingering in the deepest part of the womb, is called woman‑slaying;
then again, under the breaths of the stone,
as she looks on, she rejoices to see her own womb belching out its turbid matter,
for thereby she wards off an endless sickness.
And besides these, gagates performs many other wondrous deeds;
I know; and with its fumes, driving off reptiles, it will delight you.
Scorpio, that there was a stone of the same name as you,
the glorious hero Orion did not heed; for, I ween,
his limbs then being pierced through with bitter pains,
he would have preferred to possess it rather than the stars of them both.
Nor did one hear of the ‘Korsēen’ stone, since, when mixed
together with the pungent head of garlic, the archer
of sure‑aimed missiles, it most swiftly keeps the scorpion at bay.
This one, I declare, very much resembling a mortal belly,
when ground and mixed together with the sharpest Bakkhos, checks
the poison of the black asp, handmaid of Thanatos.
And whoever in equal measure mixes it with rose-scented oil,
having first baked it in the fire and pounded it, for pains of the neck,
brings a cure; and, when blended with sweet honey
and with water, it destroys the baneful slime in the stomach,
which, sinking straight down beneath the lower parts of men’s belly,
brings an unsightly swelling upon the groins.
Know, too, that it has the power to soften scorpion-stings,
and the great might of the Perseid coral,
and to set in place an avenging wind‑shield.
But of this, to me, the most surpassing thing of all that come to be,
—Phoibos of the unshorn hair—its nature to be from another,
declares, as it is turned into another form; whoever, I assure you,
would call that a falsehood; but I know the truth has been wrought.
For first a green plant springs up; not in the earth,
which indeed we know as the firm nurse of plants, but in the unharvested sea,
where seaweed, where light mosses come into being.
But when she, withering, comes upon old age,
then indeed her leaves wither away utterly under the brine;
but she herself, in the depths beneath the sea’s surf,
swims until the waves spit her out upon the shore.
Thereupon, all at once, her, filled full by the clear aether,
they say—those who indeed saw—was to be seen being strengthened.
But not long thereafter, having been thickly congealed by frost,
it is turned to stone; and in your own hands, jagged,
you will handle the stone, which before had a moist form.
Its shape, at any rate, of a plant still remains to it, just as once it was,
the branches too, and all the tree‑nuts that have grown fast upon them,
and the root that sprouted for it and was nourished in the sea,
and the bark just as it had been; yet the bark, for its part, is of stone.
And a sweet delight, at the sight of you, into my heart
will go; but I do not know what enchantment, when I look,
ever is distilled upon my wits; nor are my eyes able
to be sated with gazing, but amazement
races in my breast, as I suppose it to be a prodigy;
and even while trusting in it, I have deemed it incredible.
But among mortals the report of the Gorgonian dread head is no mere rumor,
that there is a dread head—so runs the tale; nor indeed did Perseus
the swift‑flying, deem it a lying portent.
For you hear that the Gorgon, serpent-maned, by Perseus—
—was subdued beneath the uttermost crags of Atlas,
a grievous maiden, Erebus-eyed, a black doom
of mortals, on whomsoever she would cast her man-slaying eyes;
who, beholding her—the monstrous, unendurable dread—
stand dead with a stony fate.
But her not even broad-breasted Atrytone consented to look upon face to face,
fearless though she was,
nor did she bid her brother, the stout-minded man,
to look upon her even as she was being slain by gold-born Perseus;
but by guile he snatched the maiden’s beast-like neck,
very softly from behind, she not foreseeing the hook-taloned blade,
casting about with his white hands the Cyllenian harpe.
And even of her, though dead, the gaze was deadly,
and to go beneath the murky house of the hateful Kronid
proved fated for many, as they were being slain by the dead woman.
But then to the beach came the hero, spattered with bloodshed,
having come, he kept at it until he washed the gore away in the sea,
the head still warm from the fray and even trembling,
the Gorgonian he set upon the green-growing plants.
While he kept catching his breath in the eddies of the sea,
stepping forth from baneful toil and the long way,
meanwhile, feasting on the dark‑purple blood, they were sated—
the bushes that had been spattered on the ground beneath the head.
And straightway around them the swift daughters of the Sea,
the breezes, rushing upon the gore, were congealing it about the bushes;
and it was hardening, so that you would wholly take it for a solid stone;
nor any longer was it possible to suppose otherwise, since it was solid stone.
and it stripped away from the plant its moist body; yet even so,
though the plant was perishing altogether, it did not destroy the form.
Then indeed it took on a red hue from the blood,
and bewilderment seized the bold hero, when he perceived
all of a sudden a great marvel; at which, coming close nearby straightaway,
Diogenes, Polymetis, Obrimopatre marveled,
and she established her brother’s fame as imperishable, so that it might be,
that the coral should always change its former nature.
And Ageleie set within it boundless might,
to guard the hosts as they go into chill strife,
or, going a long way on a trackless path, if someone has it,
or crossing the bright sea in a well-benched ship.
For even the swift spear of raving Enyalios,
and to escape the ambush of man‑slaying raiders,
and to slip away from hoary Nereus when he is churned,
the noble might of coral vouchsafes to mortals.
and the grey‑eyed, battle‑rousing, fearless Tritogeneia
they invoke as a warder‑off of their own toils.
and all the drugs that are wicked, and the binding‑spell,
and imprecations wholly the concern of the unbending Erinyes,
whether a man has not perceived a house‑ruining defilement lying hidden,
or whatever pollutions upon themselves and incantations
the wretches, begrudging one another, perform,
know it to be the mightiest counter‑charm against them all.
and having pounded it, sow it, mixing it with fair‑haired Demeter;
and all bane far away from your field,
it will drive out the droughts that drain the milk of the ears,
and the baleful hail with its countless missiles,
bringing upon the field a wound impossible to heal.
and upon them it will lay waste the whole tribe of gnawers,
grubs and caterpillars and the aetherial mildew,
which, flying down from heaven toward the fruit, red,
settles, shriveling all around the ears of grain.
the droves of mice and the boundless nation of locusts
it will drive away, and the thunderbolts of the Son of Kronos dart past,
shrinking from bringing about empty renown for his own child.
That one, by far the foremost, as he came up from beyond,
Argeiphontes, bringing coral to mortals, bestowed it;
But you, remember always to drink it with unmixed wine
on account of the resin-scented asp, as I have said.
And drink the variegated one along with the unmixed wine of Bromios,
the noble agate, arrayed in every kind of form.
Indeed, it is easy to behold many hues of the agate;
for in it you will discern, as you look, hyaline jasper,
and blood-colored sards and a gleaming emerald;
and within it it is red‑ochre‑cheeked; and even bronze in it
you will discern, and the hue of a spring‑nurtured apple;
but one alone is most preeminent of all, if you should find it
having the tawny aspect of an unconquerable lion;
to which, moreover, to call it ‘Lion‑neck’ in earlier times
was pleasing to the demigods, being dappled with little specks
fiery, and white, and blackened, and green;
and as for this one—if someone, lamenting a scorpion’s sting,
should come, bid him to swing it about the grievous wound,
or to apply it to him; for the pains diminish away from him.
and you will be able to make a man desirable to women,
and you will bewitch mortals with words, and, bringing back all things,
whatever you may ask for, you will come home rejoicing.
and it is right that even one suffering with disease be healed,
who, taking it in his own hands, holds it fast;
but if Zeus should refuse that man to live on,
then understand in your own mind that it is because for him
Klotho has snapped his thread; and the last day will come.
If an alternate‑day, fire‑blazing fever keeps visiting a man,
or a chilly fever, seizing him, prolongs its course,
or the slow bane of a quartan never consents to cease,
but always remains wherever she draws near,
do you heal this man by means of the peerless Anti‑achates;
for this stone is by far the better remedy against fevers.
And I will straightway declare a token, which swiftly shows the stone’s might.
For, upon casting it into the midst of horns that are boiling,
it will only just endure a little, while everything within melts away.
No indeed, I do not claim that even this stone has power against the creeping things,
but I will give you, since you are in need, another healer,
heaven-born; and do you set this word in your mind.
For when broad-chested Ouranos, his very body gleaming,
under the hands of Kronos the raw‑flesh‑eater,
mutilated, rolled down upon the boundless earth,
intent to fall from the bright Aither to the ground,
so that, overspreading the all‑unseen, much‑wheeled expanse,
he might fashion his own back as a covering, nor should Kronos
after vexing the spirit of starry Ouranos, still dwell in heaven;
then indeed the drops, trickling of ambrosial blood, were borne down
from the wound onto the firm, dry land,
and it was not fated for them, having departed from the immortal
body, to perish; the Moirai bade them remain in the rich‑clodded
earth—the safe blood of the forefather of the gods.
Wait then; the fire‑eyed horses of Helios have laid it out dry.
And a man, by merely touching it, would claim he holds a stone,
in his hands; yet he does in fact hold congealed blood.
for in it the very hue is the true hue of blood,
and even in water, when easily subdued, it becomes exact blood;
and even in name it is “bloody”: the stone has been so called by men of former times,
and since it seems to possess undefiled remedies,
the singers proclaim it an unerring efflux,
heavenly, to have come to humankind.
For it does not allow a new affliction to come upon mortals’ eyes,
but it keeps an older one away,
when it is drunk together with white milk; and,
mixing sweet honey with its own ichor, and having subdued it,
[lacuna]
it carries off every disease from the eyelids;
for it is vexed that mortals are hindered from seeing lovely faces
of the eldest of the Blessed, the star‑eyed king.
and for your own pupils, once it has consorted with cups,
[line missing]
it will be a remedy for a man’s privy parts, for whoever shall drink.
And as for it, I myself laid many injunctions upon battle‑minded Aias,
to set the fray in arms about blameless Achilleus,
as he rushed, to bear in his hand a helper of victory.
And even against steadfast‑minded Odysseus himself
Athênê the city‑seizer would have put glory into his hands;
but it was not his lot to heed the one who advised him;
therefore a man slighted the divinely wondrous boon,
and he seized the baneful sword. But you—the lot of such a one—
shrink from it, and go to the black brood of the slippery serpent,
having learned the reptile’s blood‑stained stone, always bid the companions
to drink among the Naiad nymphs.
And I, my nimble attendant Dolon,
being eager to make him dear to my own brother Hektor,
readily bestowed the Olympian stone when he asked;
but he straightway, before all the Trojans,
became a favored companion to Hektor, son of Priamos.
By that one’s leave he set himself to gratify me in requital,
and, eager, with an earnest appeal to his father, he bestowed
a stone, taken from his wealthy father, which once he himself—
the herald, having come from Ilion with mighty Memnon—
found from Assyria, guided by the signs I supplied, and
brought here, better than precious gold,
after giving myriad gifts there to the resourceful magoi.
But come, show forth the tale; I for my part have learned what I shall tell.
First, then, while pouring libations upon bloodless altars,
— for it is not lawful to bring a burnt-offering of a living creature —
I bid you to invoke wide-seeing Helios with hymns,
and the fertile Earth, nurse of all, rich‑uddered.
Secondly again, over the stone of fiery Hephaistos,
melt a substance that, with sweet fragrance, beguiles the long serpents;
the scent which, when they behold it rising,
hastening toward the altar, all in a throng, having come forth from the cleft,
they rush, every one of them, creeping up.
But then let the youths don freshly washed linen garments,
three in number, each bearing a sharp, double‑edged
sword, snatching up a mottled serpent, the one that most
whirls near the fire, yearning for the savour of the grease‑smoke;
and him cut joint by joint into nine portions:
three for the calling upon of all‑seeing Helios,
and three others for Gaia, rich‑soiled, folk‑sustaining,
and three for the much‑wise, unerring oracle;
and let a cauldron wrought of clay receive them, the blood‑stained portions;
and the gift, the oil of Atrytonē,
and to pour down the wine of Bromios, summoner of the chorus,
and into them let the attendants of the meal cast white salt;
and among them too the pungent foreign berry I bid
to mix—yellow‑clad, dark‑skinned, most precious;
and besides, whatever other things, when mingled together,
send to mortals a longing for the meal.
While in the belly of the tripod the meat is being cooked,
meanwhile invoke the unbreakable name of each of the Blessed Ones;
for they take delight whenever someone, in the rites,
chants the mystic proper name of the Heaven-dwellers.
and to pray that Megaira rush far away from the seething
tripod, the evil-contriving one;
and to bring the Zeus-sent breath within into those men, unto holy destinies.
and whenever it comes upon the meats as they boil,
then feast, and thereafter, eager to be sated,
straight from the tripod; and let the earth cover the leavings;
and pour for them white milk and sweet wine,
and lovely oil and the bee’s flowery food,
and, having plaited them, wreathe with the tree-fruits,
plucked from the fruit-bearing maiden olive; and about your own temples
take up veils as you go home;
and do not turn back, once you have turned away apart,
but always bearing your eyes toward the forward path
go to the hall, and do not begin conversing,
if some wayfarer meets you, until you reach the house;
and there thereafter again perform burnt-offerings for the Deathless Ones,
burning variegated aromatics.
These things having been accomplished—what shall be, and all that the light birds cry—
I know, and all that the wild beasts
flesh-eating, four-footed, howl among themselves.
Thence I also learned the Bacchic gifts of Nebrites,
the gifts of the stone, pleasing to Bromios;
which, when men possess it, let them offer sacrifice, and the Ouranidai hear their prayers.
and upon the bare ridge of the foot,
if someone, having crushed it, with a pine-wood thorn of a serpent should lacerate his own flesh through the flesh,
Nebrites will be pain-banishing for him;
and it effects for a wife a desirable husband.
Thence too I came to know the aspects of the dusky jasper,
your potent charms, O man-terrifying, wondrous stone,
whose very name and hue are that of the green leek.
Thence too, O divine Chalazios, to make trial of you
I cast in my heart, and I found your might the best.
For you do both: you cool the fiery sickness,
and for me, scorpion‑struck, you bring remedies.
By the oracles of the son of Leto, O Poïantian hero,
I declare that, in following them, I make manifest all these things as beyond contrivance.
Angered at his own sister, Argyrotoxos,
ordered Kassandra to prophesy to the hearers things not to be believed,
to prophesy to the Trojans, though she knew what is true;
but I too earlier swore a mighty oath,
never at any time to utter a lying word to human beings;
and now too, since I have set out each thing very exactly,
be persuaded by my words, hero Hekatēbole.
Thus then he spoke, the dear son of Priam, Zeus‑nurtured,
rendering thanks to the fearless attendant of Herakles;
and for the two of us, as we were going toward the grassy ridge,
the words greatly smoothed the rough, trackless way.
